Birds
Temporal range:
Scientific classification
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Chordata
Clade: Sauropsida
Clade: Archosauria
Clade: Avemetatarsalia
Clade: Dinosauria
Clade: Theropoda
Clade: Ornithurae
Class: Aves
Linnaeus, 1758[3]
Extant clades
Palaeognathae (ratites and tinamous)
Struthioniformes (ostrich)
Notopalaeognathae
Bird
Birds are a group of warm-blooded theropod dinosaurs
constituting the class Aves, characterised by feathers, toothless
beaked jaws, the laying of hard-shelled eggs, a high metabolic
rate, a four-chambered heart, and a strong yet lightweight
skeleton. Birds live worldwide and range in size from the
5.5 cm (2.2 in) bee hummingbird to the 2.8 m (9 ft 2 in)
common ostrich. There are over 11,000 living species and they
are split into 44 orders. More than half are passerine or
"perching" birds. Birds have wings whose development varies
according to species; the only known groups without wings are
the extinct moa and elephant birds. Wings, which are modified
forelimbs, gave birds the ability to fly, although further
evolution has led to the loss of flight in some birds, including
ratites, penguins, and diverse endemic island species. The
digestive and respiratory systems of birds are also uniquely
adapted for flight. Some bird species of aquatic environments,
particularly seabirds and some waterbirds, have further
evolved for swimming. The study of birds is called
ornithology.
Birds evolved from earlier theropods, and thus constitute the
only known living dinosaurs. Likewise, birds are considered
reptiles in the modern cladistic sense of the term, and their
closest living relatives are the crocodilians. Birds are
descendants of the primitive avialans (whose members include
Archaeopteryx) which first appeared during the Late Jurassic.
According to some estimates, modern birds (Neornithes)
evolved in the Late Cretaceous or between the Early and Late
Cretaceous (100 Ma) and diversified dramatically around the
time of the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event 66 million
years ago, which killed off the pterosaurs and all non-
ornithuran dinosaurs.[4][5]
Many social species preserve knowledge across generations
(culture). Birds are social, communicating with visual signals,
calls, and songs, and participating in such behaviour as
cooperative breeding and hunting, flocking, and mobbing of
predators. The vast majority of bird species are socially (but
not necessarily sexually) monogamous, usually for one
breeding season at a time, sometimes for years, and rarely for
life. Other species have breeding systems that are polygynous
(one male with many females) or, rarely, polyandrous (one
female with many males). Birds produce offspring by laying
Neognathae
Pangalloanserae (fowl)
Neoaves
Synonyms
Neornithes Gadow, 1883
Archaeopteryx is often considered the
oldest known true bird.
Reptiles
Squamates Lizards & snakes
Pantestudines Turtles
Archosaurs
Crocodiles
eggs which are fertilised through sexual reproduction. They are
usually laid in a nest and incubated by the parents. Most birds
have an extended period of parental care after hatching.
Many species of birds are economically important as food for
human consumption and raw material in manufacturing, with
domesticated and undomesticated birds being important
sources of eggs, meat, and feathers. Songbirds, parrots, and
other species are popular as pets. Guano (bird excrement) is
harvested for use as a fertiliser. Birds figure throughout human
culture. About 120 to 130 species have become extinct due to human activity since the 17th century, and hundreds
more before then. Human activity threatens about 1,200 bird species with extinction, though efforts are underway
to protect them. Recreational birdwatching is an important part of the ecotourism industry.
The first classification of birds was developed by Francis Willughby
and John Ray in their 1676 volume Ornithologiae.[6] Carl Linnaeus
modified that work in 1758 to devise the taxonomic classification
system currently in use.[7] Birds are usually categorised as a biological
class in traditional evolutionary taxonomy. Modern phylogenetic
taxonomy places Aves in the clade Theropoda, sometimes with a
Linnean rank lower than class, such as subclass[8] or infraclass.[9]
Aves and a sister group, the order Crocodilia, contain the only living
representatives of the reptile clade Archosauria. During the late 1990s,
Aves was most commonly defined phylogenetically as all descendants
of the most recent common ancestor of modern birds and
Archaeopteryx lithographica.[10] However, an earlier definition
proposed by Jacques Gauthier gained wide currency in the 21st
century, and is used by many scientists including adherents to the
PhyloCode. Gauthier defined Aves to include only the crown group of
the set of modern birds. This was done by excluding most groups
known only from fossils, and assigning them, instead, to the broader
group Avialae,[11] on the principle that a clade based on extant species should be limited to those extant species and
their closest extinct relatives.[11]
Gauthier and de Queiroz identified four different definitions for the same biological name "Aves", which is a
problem.[12] The authors proposed to reserve the term Aves only for the crown group consisting of the last
common ancestor of all living birds and all of its descendants,[12] which corresponds to meaning number 4 below.
They assigned other names to the other groups.[12]
1. Aves can mean all archosaurs closer to birds than
to crocodiles (alternately Avemetatarsalia)
2. Aves can mean those advanced archosaurs with
feathers (alternately Avifilopluma)
3. Aves can mean those feathered dinosaurs that fly
(alternately Avialae)
Evolution and classification
Definition
Birds
The birds' phylogenetic relationships to major living
reptile groups. (The turtles' position is uncertain: Some
authorities embed them inside the Archosaurs, with birds and
crocodiles.)
Maniraptoromorpha
†Coelurus
†Ornitholestes
Maniraptoriformes
†Ornithomimosauria
Maniraptora
†Alvarezsauridae
Pennaraptora
†Oviraptorosauria
Paraves
Cladogram showing the results of a phylogenetic study by Cau, 2018.[14]
Paraves
†Scansoriopterygidae
†Eosinopteryx
Eumaniraptora
†Jinfengopteryx
†Aurornis
†Dromaeosauridae
†Troodontidae
Simplified phylogenetic tree showing the relationship
between modern birds and other dinosaurs[21]
4. Aves can mean the last common ancestor of all the
currently living birds and all of its descendants (a
"crown group", in this sense synonymous with
Neornithes)
Under the fourth definition Archaeopteryx, traditionally
considered one of the earliest members of Aves, is removed
from this group, becoming a non-avian dinosaur instead. These proposals have been adopted by many researchers
in the field of palaeontology and bird evolution, though the exact definitions applied have been inconsistent.
Avialae, initially proposed to replace the traditional fossil content of Aves, is often used synonymously with the
vernacular term "bird" by these researchers.[13]
Most researchers define Avialae as branch-based clade, though definitions vary. Many authors have used a
definition similar to "all theropods closer to birds than to Deinonychus",[15][16] with Troodon being sometimes
added as a second external specifier in case it is closer to birds than to Deinonychus.[17] Avialae is also
occasionally defined as an apomorphy-based clade (that is, one based on physical characteristics). Jacques
Gauthier, who named Avialae in 1986, re-defined it in 2001 as all dinosaurs that possessed feathered wings used in
flapping flight, and the birds that descended from them.[12][18]
Despite being currently one of the most widely used, the crown-group definition of Aves has been criticised by
some researchers. Lee and Spencer (1997) argued that, contrary to what Gauthier defended, this definition would
not increase the stability of the clade and the exact content of Aves will always be uncertain because any defined
clade (either crown or not) will have few synapomorphies distinguishing it from its closest relatives. Their
alternative definition is synonymous to Avifilopluma.[19]
Dinosaurs and the origin of birds
Avialae
Cladogram following the results of a phylogenetic
study by Cau et al., 2015[20]
Anchiornis huxleyi is an important source
of information on the early evolution of
birds in the Late Jurassic period.[27]
Confuciusornis sanctus, a Cretaceous
bird from China that lived 125 million
years ago, is the oldest known bird to
have a beak.[33]
Based on fossil and biological evidence, most scientists
accept that birds are a specialised subgroup of theropod
dinosaurs[22] and, more specifically, members of
Maniraptora, a group of theropods which includes
dromaeosaurids and oviraptorosaurs, among others.[23] As
scientists have discovered more theropods closely related to birds, the previously clear distinction between non-
birds and birds has become blurred. By the 2000s, discoveries in the Liaoning Province of northeast China, which
demonstrated many small theropod feathered dinosaurs, contributed to this ambiguity.[24][25][26]
The consensus view in contemporary palaeontology is that the flying
theropods, or avialans, are the closest relatives of the deinonychosaurs,
which include dromaeosaurids and troodontids.[28] Together, these
form a group called Paraves. Some basal members of
Deinonychosauria, such as Microraptor, have features which may have
enabled them to glide or fly. The most basal deinonychosaurs were
very small. This evidence raises the possibility that the ancestor of all
paravians may have been arboreal, have been able to glide, or
both.[29][30] Unlike Archaeopteryx and the non-avialan feathered
dinosaurs, who primarily ate meat, studies suggest that the first
avialans were omnivores.[31]
The Late Jurassic Archaeopteryx is well known as one of the first
transitional fossils to be found, and it provided support for the theory
of evolution in the late 19th century. Archaeopteryx was the first fossil
to display both clearly traditional reptilian characteristics—teeth,
clawed fingers, and a long, lizard-like tail—as well as wings with flight feathers similar to those of modern birds.
It is not considered a direct ancestor of birds, though it is possibly closely related to the true ancestor.[32]
Over 40% of key traits found in modern birds evolved during the
60 million year transition from the earliest bird-line archosaurs to the
first maniraptoromorphs, i.e. the first dinosaurs closer to living birds
than to Tyrannosaurus rex. The loss of osteoderms otherwise common
in archosaurs and acquisition of primitive feathers might have occurred
early during this phase.[14][34] After the appearance of
Maniraptoromorpha, the next 40 million years marked a continuous
reduction of body size and the accumulation of neotenic (juvenile-like)
characteristics. Hypercarnivory became increasingly less common
while braincases enlarged and forelimbs became longer.[14] The
integument evolved into complex, pennaceous feathers.[34]
The oldest known paravian (and probably the earliest avialan) fossils
come from the Tiaojishan Formation of China, which has been dated to the late Jurassic period (Oxfordian stage),
about 160 million years ago. The avialan species from this time period include Anchiornis huxleyi, Xiaotingia
zhengi, and Aurornis xui.[13]
The well-known probable early avialan, Archaeopteryx, dates from slightly later Jurassic rocks (about 155 million
years old) from Germany. Many of these early avialans shared unusual anatomical features that may be ancestral to
modern birds but were later lost during bird evolution. These features include enlarged claws on the second toe
which may have been held clear of the ground in life, and long feathers or "hind wings" covering the hind limbs
and feet, which may have been used in aerial maneuvering.[35]
Early evolution
Avialae
†Anchiornis
†Archaeopteryx
†Xiaotingia
†Rahonavis
†Jeholornis
†Jixiangornis
Euavialae
†Balaur
Avebrevicauda
†Zhongjianornis
†Sapeornis
Pygostylia
†Confuciusornithiformes
†Protopteryx
†Pengornis
Ornithothoraces
Cladogram following the results of a phylogenetic study by Cau et al., 2015[20]
Ornithothoraces
†Enantiornithes
Euornithes
†Archaeorhynchus
Ornithuromorpha †Patagopteryx
†Vorona
†Schizooura
Avialans diversified into a wide variety of forms during the Cretaceous period. Many groups retained primitive
characteristics, such as clawed wings and teeth, though the latter were lost independently in a number of avialan
groups, including modern birds (Aves).[36] Increasingly stiff tails (especially the outermost half) can be seen in the
evolution of maniraptoromorphs, and this process culminated in the appearance of the pygostyle, an ossification of
fused tail vertebrae.[14] In the late Cretaceous, about 100 million years ago, the ancestors of all modern birds
evolved a more open pelvis, allowing them to lay larger eggs compared to body size.[37] Around 95 million years
ago, they evolved a better sense of smell.[38]
A third stage of bird evolution starting with Ornithothoraces (the "bird-chested" avialans) can be associated with
the refining of aerodynamics and flight capabilities, and the loss or co-ossification of several skeletal features.
Particularly significant are the development of an enlarged, keeled sternum and the alula, and the loss of grasping
hands. [14]
The first large, diverse lineage of
short-tailed avialans to evolve
were the Enantiornithes, or
"opposite birds", so named
because the construction of their
shoulder bones was in reverse to
that of modern birds.
Enantiornithes occupied a wide
array of ecological niches, from
sand-probing shorebirds and
fish-eaters to tree-dwelling
forms and seed-eaters. While
they were the dominant group of
avialans during the Cretaceous
period, Enantiornithes became
extinct along with many other
dinosaur groups at the end of the
Mesozoic era.[36][40]
Many species of the second
major avialan lineage to
diversify, the Euornithes
(meaning "true birds", because
they include the ancestors of
modern birds), were
semi-aquatic and
specialised in eating
fish and other small
aquatic organisms.
Unlike the
Enantiornithes,
which dominated
land-based and
arboreal habitats,
Early diversity of bird
ancestors
†Hongshanornithidae
†Jianchangornis
†Songlingornithidae
†Gansus
†Apsaravis
Ornithurae
†Hesperornithes
†Ichthyornis
†Vegavis
Aves
Mesozoic bird phylogeny simplified after Wang et al., 2015's phylogenetic analysis[39]
Ichthyornis, which lived
93 million years ago, was the
first known prehistoric bird
relative preserved with teeth.
Aves
Palaeognathae (ratites and tinamous)
Neognathae
Galloanserae (landfowl and
waterfowl)
Neoaves
(all other birds
including perching
birds)
Major groups of modern birds based on Sibley-Ahlquist
taxonomy
most early
euornithians lacked
perching adaptations
and likely included
shorebird-like
species, waders, and
swimming and
diving species.[41]
The latter included the superficially gull-like Ichthyornis[42] and the
Hesperornithiformes, which became so well adapted to hunting fish in marine
environments that they lost the ability to fly and became primarily aquatic.[36]
The early euornithians also saw the development of many traits associated with
modern birds, like strongly keeled breastbones, toothless, beaked portions of
their jaws (though most non-avian euornithians retained teeth in other parts of
the jaws).[43] Euornithes also included the first avialans to develop true
pygostyle and a fully mobile fan of tail feathers,[44] which may have replaced
the "hind wing" as the primary mode of aerial maneuverability and braking in
flight.[35]
A study on mosaic evolution in the avian skull found that the last common
ancestor of all Neornithes might have had a beak similar to that of the modern
hook-billed vanga and a skull similar to that of the Eurasian golden oriole. As
both species are small aerial and canopy foraging omnivores, a similar ecological niche was inferred for this
hypothetical ancestor.[45]
Most studies agree on a Cretaceous age for the
most recent common ancestor of modern birds
but estimates range from the Early
Cretaceous[46][47] to the latest Cretaceous.[48][49]
Similarly, there is no agreement on whether most
of the early diversification of modern birds
occurred in the Cretaceous and associated with
breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana or
occurred later and potentially as a consequence
of the Cretaceous–Palaeogene extinction
event.[50] This disagreement is in part caused by
Diversification of modern birds
a divergence in the evidence; most molecular dating studies suggests a Cretaceous evolutionary radiation, while
fossil evidence points to a Cenozoic radiation (the so-called 'rocks' versus 'clocks' controversy).
The discovery in 2005 of Vegavis from the Maastrichtian, the last stage of the Late Cretaceous, proved that the
diversification of modern birds started before the Cenozoic era.[51] The affinities of an earlier fossil, the possible
galliform Austinornis lentus, dated to about 85 million years ago,[52] are still too controversial to provide a fossil
evidence of modern bird diversification. In 2020, Asteriornis from the Maastrichtian was described, it appears to
be a close relative of Galloanserae, the earliest diverging lineage within Neognathae.[1]
Attempts to reconcile molecular and fossil evidence using genomic-scale DNA data and comprehensive fossil
information have not resolved the controversy.[48][53] However, a 2015 estimate that used a new method for
calibrating molecular clocks confirmed that while modern birds originated early in the Late Cretaceous, likely in
Western Gondwana, a pulse of diversification in all major groups occurred around the Cretaceous–Palaeogene
extinction event.[4] Modern birds would have expanded from West Gondwana through two routes. One route was
an Antarctic interchange in the Paleogene. The other route was probably via Paleocene land bridges between South
America and North America, which allowed for the rapid expansion and diversification of Neornithes into the
Holarctic and Paleotropics.[4] On the other hand, the occurrence of Asteriornis in the Northern Hemisphere suggest
that Neornithes dispersed out of East Gondwana before the Paleocene.[1]
All modern birds lie within the crown group Aves (alternately Neornithes), which has two subdivisions: the
Palaeognathae, which includes the flightless ratites (such as the ostriches) and the weak-flying tinamous, and the
extremely diverse Neognathae, containing all other birds.[54] These two subdivisions have variously been given the
rank of superorder,[55] cohort,[9] or infraclass.[56] The number of known living bird species is around 11,000[57][58]
although sources may differ in their precise numbers.
Cladogram of modern bird relationships based on Stiller et al (2024).,[59] showing the 44 orders recognised by the
IOC.[57]
Aves
Palaeognathae
Struthioniformes (ostriches)
Notopalaeognathae
Tinamiformes (tinamous)
Rheiformes (rheas)
Novaeratitae
Apterygiformes (kiwis)
Casuariiformes (emu and cassowaries)
Neognathae
Galloanserae
Galliformes (chickens, pheasants, and relatives)
Classification of bird orders
Anseriformes (ducks, geese, and relatives)
Neoaves
Mirandornithes
Phoenicopteriformes (flamingos)
Podicipediformes (grebes)
Columbaves
Columbimorphae
Columbiformes (
Pteroclimesites
Mesitornithiform
Pterocliformes
Otidimorphae
Musophagiformes (turacos)
Otidiformes (bustards)
Cuculiformes (cuckoos)
Elementaves
Gruae
Opisthocomifo
Gruimorphae
Gruiformes
Charadriifor
Strisores
Ca
Vanescaves
S
L
Phaethoquornithes
Eurypygimorph
Aequornithes
Telluraves Afroaves
Hieraves
Strigi
Accip
Coraciimorphae
Cavita
Australaves
Caria
Eufalconimorphae
Psitt
The classification of birds is a contentious issue. Sibley and Ahlquist's Phylogeny and Classification of Birds
(1990) is a landmark work on the subject.[60] Most evidence seems to suggest the assignment of orders is
accurate,[61] but scientists disagree about the relationships among the orders themselves; evidence from modern
bird anatomy, fossils and DNA have all been brought to bear on the problem, but no strong consensus has emerged.
Fossil and molecular evidence from the 2010s is providing an increasingly clear picture of the evolution of modern
bird orders.[48][53]
The range of the house sparrow has
expanded dramatically due to human
activities.[65]
In 2010, the genome had been sequenced for only two birds, the chicken and the zebra finch. As of 2022, the
genomes of 542 species of birds had been completed. At least one genome has been sequenced from every
order.[62][63] These include at least one species in about 90% of extant avian families (218 out of 236 families
recognised by the Howard and Moore Checklist).[64]
Being able to sequence and compare whole genomes gives researchers many types of information, about genes, the
DNA that regulates the genes, and their evolutionary history. This has led to reconsideration of some of the
classifications that were based solely on the identification of protein-coding genes. Waterbirds such as pelicans and
flamingos, for example, may have in common specific adaptations suited to their environment that were developed
independently.[62][63]
Birds live and breed in most terrestrial habitats and on all seven
continents, reaching their southern extreme in the snow petrel's
breeding colonies up to 440 kilometres (270 mi) inland in
Antarctica.[66] The highest bird diversity occurs in tropical regions. It
was earlier thought that this high diversity was the result of higher
speciation rates in the tropics; however studies from the 2000s found
higher speciation rates in the high latitudes that were offset by greater
extinction rates than in the tropics.[67] Many species migrate annually
over great distances and across oceans; several families of birds have
adapted to life both on the world's oceans and in them, and some
seabird species come ashore only to breed,[68] while some penguins
have been recorded diving up to 300 metres (980 ft) deep.[69]
Many bird species have established breeding populations in areas to which they have been introduced by humans.
Some of these introductions have been deliberate; the ring-necked pheasant, for example, has been introduced
around the world as a game bird.[70] Others have been accidental, such as the establishment of wild monk
parakeets in several North American cities after their escape from captivity.[71] Some species, including cattle
egret,[72] yellow-headed caracara[73] and galah,[74] have spread naturally far beyond their original ranges as
agricultural expansion created alternative habitats although modern practices of intensive agriculture have
negatively impacted farmland bird populations.[75]
Compared with other vertebrates, birds have a body plan that shows many unusual adaptations, mostly to facilitate
flight.
The skeleton consists of very lightweight bones. They have large air-filled cavities (called pneumatic cavities)
which connect with the respiratory system.[76] The skull bones in adults are fused and do not show cranial
sutures.[77] The orbital cavities that house the eyeballs are large and separated from each other by a bony septum
(partition). The spine has cervical, thoracic, lumbar and caudal regions with the number of cervical (neck)
vertebrae highly variable and especially flexible, but movement is reduced in the anterior thoracic vertebrae and
absent in the later vertebrae.[78] The last few are fused with the pelvis to form the synsacrum.[77] The ribs are
Genomics
Distribution
Anatomy and physiology
Skeletal system
External anatomy of a bird (example: yellow-wattled
lapwing): 1 Beak · 2 Head · 3 Iris · 4 Pupil ·
5 Mantle · 6 Lesser coverts · 7 Scapulars ·
8 Median coverts · 9 Tertials · 10 Rump ·
11 Primaries · 12 Vent · 13 Thigh · 14 Tibio-
tarsal articulation · 15 Tarsus · 16 Foot ·
17 Tibia · 18 Belly · 19 Flanks · 20 Breast ·
21 Throat · 22 Wattle · 23 Eyestripe
Adult eastern phoebe removing fecal sac
of a fledgling
flattened and the sternum is keeled for the attachment of
flight muscles except in the flightless bird orders. The
forelimbs are modified into wings.[79] The wings are
more or less developed depending on the species; the
only known groups that lost their wings are the extinct
moa and elephant birds.[80]
Like reptiles, birds are primarily uricotelic; that is, their
kidneys extract nitrogenous waste from their
bloodstream and excrete it as uric acid, instead of urea or
ammonia, through the ureters into the intestine. Birds do
not have a urinary bladder or external urethral opening.
With the exception of the ostrich, uric acid is excreted
along with faeces as a semisolid waste.[81][82][83]
However, birds such as hummingbirds can be
facultatively ammonotelic, excreting most of the
nitrogenous wastes as ammonia.[84] They also excrete
creatine, rather than creatinine like mammals.[77] This
material, as well as the output of the intestines, emerges
from the bird's cloaca.[85][86] The cloaca is a multi-purpose opening: waste is expelled through it, most birds mate
by joining cloaca, and females lay eggs from it. In addition, many species of birds regurgitate pellets.[87]
It is a common but not universal feature of altricial passerine nestlings (born helpless, under constant parental care)
that instead of excreting directly into the nest, they produce a fecal sac. This is a mucus-covered pouch that allows
parents to either dispose of the waste outside the nest or to recycle the waste through their own digestive
system.[88]
Most male birds do not have intromittent penises.[89] Males within
Palaeognathae (with the exception of the kiwis), the Anseriformes
(with the exception of screamers), and in rudimentary forms in
Galliformes (but fully developed in Cracidae) possess a penis, which is
never present in Neoaves.[90][91] Its length is thought to be related to
sperm competition[92] and it fills with lymphatic fluid instead of blood
when erect.[93] When not copulating, it is hidden within the
proctodeum compartment within the cloaca, just inside the vent.
Female birds have sperm storage tubules[94] that allow sperm to remain
viable long after copulation, a hundred days in some species.[95] Sperm
from multiple males may compete through this mechanism. Most
female birds have a single ovary and a single oviduct, both on the left
side,[96] but there are exceptions: species in at least 16 different orders
of birds have two ovaries. Even these species, however, tend to have a
single oviduct.[96] It has been speculated that this might be an adaptation to flight, but males have two testes, and it
is also observed that the gonads in both sexes decrease dramatically in size outside the breeding season.[97][98]
Also terrestrial birds generally have a single ovary, as does the platypus, an egg-laying mammal. A more likely
explanation is that the egg develops a shell while passing through the oviduct over a period of about a day, so that
if two eggs were to develop at the same time, there would be a risk to survival.[96] While rare, mostly abortive,
parthenogenesis is not unknown in birds and eggs can be diploid, automictic and results in male offspring.[99]
Excretory system
Reproductive system
Didactic model of an
avian heart
Birds are solely gonochoric,[100] meaning they have two sexes: either female or male. The sex of birds is
determined by the Z and W sex chromosomes, rather than by the X and Y chromosomes present in mammals. Male
birds have two Z chromosomes (ZZ), and female birds have a W chromosome and a Z chromosome (WZ).[77] A
complex system of disassortative mating with two morphs is involved in the white-throated sparrow Zonotrichia
albicollis, where white- and tan-browed morphs of opposite sex pair, making it appear as if four sexes were
involved since any individual is compatible with only a fourth of the population.[101]
In nearly all species of birds, an individual's sex is determined at fertilisation. However, one 2007 study claimed to
demonstrate temperature-dependent sex determination among the Australian brushturkey, for which higher
temperatures during incubation resulted in a higher female-to-male sex ratio.[102] This, however, was later proven
to not be the case. These birds do not exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination, but temperature-dependent
sex mortality.[103]
Birds have one of the most complex respiratory systems of all animal groups.[77] Upon inhalation, 75% of the fresh
air bypasses the lungs and flows directly into a posterior air sac which extends from the lungs and connects with
air spaces in the bones and fills them with air. The other 25% of the air goes directly into the lungs. When the bird
exhales, the used air flows out of the lungs and the stored fresh air from the posterior air sac is simultaneously
forced into the lungs. Thus, a bird's lungs receive a constant supply of fresh air during both inhalation and
exhalation.[104] Sound production is achieved using the syrinx, a muscular chamber incorporating multiple
tympanic membranes which diverges from the lower end of the trachea;[105] the trachea being elongated in some
species, increasing the volume of vocalisations and the perception of the bird's size.[106]
In birds, the main arteries taking blood away from the heart originate from the right aortic arch (or pharyngeal
arch), unlike in the mammals where the left aortic arch forms this part of the aorta.[77] The postcava receives blood
from the limbs via the renal portal system. Unlike in mammals, the circulating red blood cells in birds retain their
nucleus.[107]
The avian circulatory system is driven by a four-chambered, myogenic heart
contained in a fibrous pericardial sac. This pericardial sac is filled with a serous fluid
for lubrication.[108] The heart itself is divided into a right and left half, each with an
atrium and ventricle. The atrium and ventricles of each side are separated by
atrioventricular valves which prevent back flow from one chamber to the next during
contraction. Being myogenic, the heart's pace is maintained by pacemaker cells
found in the sinoatrial node, located on the right atrium.[109]
The sinoatrial node uses calcium to cause a depolarising signal transduction pathway
from the atrium through right and left atrioventricular bundle which communicates
contraction to the ventricles. The avian heart also consists of muscular arches that are
made up of thick bundles of muscular layers. Much like a mammalian heart, the
avian heart is composed of endocardial, myocardial and epicardial layers.[108] The
atrium walls tend to be thinner than the ventricle walls, due to the intense ventricular
contraction used to pump oxygenated blood throughout the body. Avian hearts are generally larger than
mammalian hearts when compared to body mass. This adaptation allows more blood to be pumped to meet the
high metabolic need associated with flight.[110]
Respiratory and circulatory systems
Heart type and features
The nictitating membrane as it covers the eye of a
masked lapwing
Birds have a very efficient system for diffusing oxygen into the blood; birds have a ten times greater surface area
to gas exchange volume than mammals. As a result, birds have more blood in their capillaries per unit of volume of
lung than a mammal.[110] The arteries are composed of thick elastic muscles to withstand the pressure of the
ventricular contractions, and become more rigid as they move away from the heart. Blood moves through the
arteries, which undergo vasoconstriction, and into arterioles which act as a transportation system to distribute
primarily oxygen as well as nutrients to all tissues of the body. As the arterioles move away from the heart and into
individual organs and tissues they are further divided to increase surface area and slow blood flow. Blood travels
through the arterioles and moves into the capillaries where gas exchange can occur.[111]
Capillaries are organised into capillary beds in tissues; it is here that blood exchanges oxygen for carbon dioxide
waste. In the capillary beds, blood flow is slowed to allow maximum diffusion of oxygen into the tissues. Once the
blood has become deoxygenated, it travels through venules then veins and back to the heart. Veins, unlike arteries,
are thin and rigid as they do not need to withstand extreme pressure. As blood travels through the venules to the
veins a funneling occurs called vasodilation bringing blood back to the heart.[111] Once the blood reaches the heart,
it moves first into the right atrium, then the right ventricle to be pumped through the lungs for further gas exchange
of carbon dioxide waste for oxygen. Oxygenated blood then flows from the lungs through the left atrium to the left
ventricle where it is pumped out to the body.[19]
The nervous system is large relative to the bird's size.[77] The most developed part of the brain of birds is the one
that controls the flight-related functions, while the cerebellum coordinates movement and the cerebrum controls
behaviour patterns, navigation, mating and nest building. Most birds have a poor sense of smell[112] with notable
exceptions including kiwis,[113] New World vultures[114] and tubenoses.[115] The avian visual system is usually
highly developed. Water birds have special flexible lenses, allowing accommodation for vision in air and water.[77]
Some species also have dual fovea. Birds are tetrachromatic, possessing ultraviolet (UV) sensitive cone cells in the
eye as well as green, red and blue ones.[116] They also have double cones, likely to mediate achromatic vision.[117]
Many birds show plumage patterns in ultraviolet that are
invisible to the human eye; some birds whose sexes
appear similar to the naked eye are distinguished by the
presence of ultraviolet reflective patches on their
feathers. Male blue tits have an ultraviolet reflective
crown patch which is displayed in courtship by posturing
and raising of their nape feathers.[118] Ultraviolet light is
also used in foraging—kestrels have been shown to
search for prey by detecting the UV fluorescent urine
trail marks left on the ground by rodents.[119] With the
exception of pigeons and a few other species,[120] the eyelids of birds are not used in blinking. Instead the eye is
lubricated by the nictitating membrane, a third eyelid that moves horizontally.[121] The nictitating membrane also
covers the eye and acts as a contact lens in many aquatic birds.[77] The bird retina has a fan shaped blood supply
system called the pecten.[77]
Eyes of most birds are large, not very round and capable of only limited movement in the orbits,[77] typically 10–
20°.[122] Birds with eyes on the sides of their heads have a wide visual field, while birds with eyes on the front of
their heads, such as owls, have binocular vision and can estimate the depth of field.[122][123] The avian ear lacks
external pinnae but is covered by feathers, although in some birds, such as the Asio, Bubo and Otus owls, these
feathers form tufts which resemble ears. The inner ear has a cochlea, but it is not a spiral as in mammals.[124]
Several species have been demonstrated to hear infrasound (below 20 Hz)[125] and a few cave-dwelling swifts and
oilbirds emit ultrasound (above 20 kHz) and echolocate in darkness.[126]
Organisation
Nervous system
The disruptively patterned plumage of the
African scops owl allows it to blend in
with its surroundings.
A few species are able to use chemical defences against predators; some Procellariiformes can eject an unpleasant
stomach oil against an aggressor,[127] and some species of pitohuis from New Guinea have a powerful neurotoxin
in their skin and feathers.[128]
A lack of field observations limit our knowledge, but intraspecific conflicts are known to sometimes result in
injury or death.[129] The screamers (Anhimidae), some jacanas (Jacana, Hydrophasianus), the spur-winged goose
(Plectropterus), the torrent duck (Merganetta) and nine species of lapwing (Vanellus) use a sharp spur on the wing
as a weapon. The steamer ducks (Tachyeres), geese and swans (Anserinae), the solitaire (Pezophaps), sheathbills
(Chionis), some guans (Crax) and stone curlews (Burhinus) use a bony knob on the alular metacarpal to punch and
hammer opponents.[129] The jacanas Actophilornis and Irediparra have an expanded, blade-like radius. The extinct
Xenicibis was unique in having an elongate forelimb and massive hand which likely functioned in combat or
defence as a jointed club or flail. Swans, for instance, may strike with the bony spurs and bite when defending eggs
or young.[129]
Feathers are a feature characteristic of birds (though also present in
some dinosaurs not currently considered to be true birds). They
facilitate flight, provide insulation that aids in thermoregulation, and
are used in display, camouflage, and signalling.[77] There are several
types of feathers, each serving its own set of purposes. Feathers are
epidermal growths attached to the skin and arise only in specific tracts
of skin called pterylae. The distribution pattern of these feather tracts
(pterylosis) is used in taxonomy and systematics. The arrangement and
appearance of feathers on the body, called plumage, may vary within
species by age, social status,[130] and sex.[131]
Plumage is regularly moulted; the standard plumage of a bird that has
moulted after breeding is known as the "non-breeding" plumage, or—
in the Humphrey–Parkes terminology—"basic" plumage; breeding
plumages or variations of the basic plumage are known under the Humphrey–Parkes system as "alternate"
plumages.[132] Moulting is annual in most species, although some may have two moults a year, and large birds of
prey may moult only once every few years. Moulting patterns vary across species. In passerines, flight feathers are
replaced one at a time with the innermost primary being the first. When the fifth of sixth primary is replaced, the
outermost tertiaries begin to drop. After the innermost tertiaries are moulted, the secondaries starting from the
innermost begin to drop and this proceeds to the outer feathers (centrifugal moult). The greater primary coverts are
moulted in synchrony with the primary that they overlap.[133]
A small number of species, such as ducks and geese, lose all of their flight feathers at once, temporarily becoming
flightless.[134] As a general rule, the tail feathers are moulted and replaced starting with the innermost pair.[133]
Centripetal moults of tail feathers are however seen in the Phasianidae.[135] The centrifugal moult is modified in
the tail feathers of woodpeckers and treecreepers, in that it begins with the second innermost pair of feathers and
finishes with the central pair of feathers so that the bird maintains a functional climbing tail.[133][136] The general
pattern seen in passerines is that the primaries are replaced outward, secondaries inward, and the tail from centre
outward.[137] Before nesting, the females of most bird species gain a bare brood patch by losing feathers close to
the belly. The skin there is well supplied with blood vessels and helps the bird in incubation.[138]
Feathers require maintenance and birds preen or groom them daily, spending an average of around 9% of their
daily time on this.[139] The bill is used to brush away foreign particles and to apply waxy secretions from the
uropygial gland; these secretions protect the feathers' flexibility and act as an antimicrobial agent, inhibiting the
Defence and intraspecific combat
Feathers, plumage, and scales
Red lory preening
Restless flycatcher in the downstroke of
flapping flight
growth of feather-degrading bacteria.[140] This may be supplemented with the
secretions of formic acid from ants, which birds receive through a behaviour
known as anting, to remove feather parasites.[141]
The scales of birds are composed of the same keratin as beaks, claws, and spurs.
They are found mainly on the toes and metatarsus, but may be found further up
on the ankle in some birds. Most bird scales do not overlap significantly, except
in the cases of kingfishers and woodpeckers. The scales of birds are thought to
be homologous to those of reptiles and mammals.[142]
Most birds can fly, which distinguishes them from almost all other vertebrate
classes. Flight is the primary means of locomotion for most bird species and is
used for searching for food and for escaping from predators. Birds have
various adaptations for flight, including a lightweight skeleton, two
large flight muscles, the pectoralis (which accounts for 15% of the total
mass of the bird) and the supracoracoideus, as well as a modified
forelimb (wing) that serves as an aerofoil.[77]
Wing shape and size generally determine a bird's flight style and
performance; many birds combine powered, flapping flight with less
energy-intensive soaring flight. About 60 extant bird species are
flightless, as were many extinct birds.[143] Flightlessness often arises in
birds on isolated islands, most likely due to limited resources and the
absence of mammalian land predators.[144] Flightlessness is almost
exclusively correlated with gigantism due to an island's inherent
condition of isolation.[145][146] Although flightless, penguins use similar musculature and movements to "fly"
through the water, as do some flight-capable birds such as auks, shearwaters and dippers.[147]
Most birds are diurnal, but some birds, such as many species of owls and nightjars, are nocturnal or crepuscular
(active during twilight hours), and many coastal waders feed when the tides are appropriate, by day or night.[148]
Birds' diets are varied and often include nectar, fruit, plants, seeds, carrion, and various small animals, including
other birds.[77] The digestive system of birds is unique, with a crop for storage and a gizzard that contains
swallowed stones for grinding food to compensate for the lack of teeth.[149] Some species such as pigeons and
some psittacine species do not have a gallbladder.[150] Most birds are highly adapted for rapid digestion to aid with
flight.[151] Some migratory birds have adapted to use protein stored in many parts of their bodies, including protein
from the intestines, as additional energy during migration.[152]
Birds that employ many strategies to obtain food or feed on a variety of food items are called generalists, while
others that concentrate time and effort on specific food items or have a single strategy to obtain food are
considered specialists.[77] Avian foraging strategies can vary widely by species. Many birds glean for insects,
invertebrates, fruit, or seeds. Some hunt insects by suddenly attacking from a branch. Those species that seek pest
insects are considered beneficial 'biological control agents' and their presence encouraged in biological pest control
programmes.[153] Combined, insectivorous birds eat 400–500 million metric tons of arthropods annually.[154]
Flight
Behaviour
Diet and feeding
Feeding adaptations in
beaks
Feral pigeon eating bread.
Nectar feeders such as hummingbirds, sunbirds, lories, and lorikeets amongst others
have specially adapted brushy tongues and in many cases bills designed to fit co-
adapted flowers.[155] Kiwis and shorebirds with long bills probe for invertebrates;
shorebirds' varied bill lengths and feeding methods result in the separation of
ecological niches.[77][156] Divers, diving ducks, penguins and auks pursue their prey
underwater, using their wings or feet for propulsion,[68] while aerial predators such as
sulids, kingfishers and terns plunge dive after their prey. Flamingos, three species of
prion, and some ducks are filter feeders.[157][158] Geese and dabbling ducks are
primarily grazers.[159][160]
Some species, including frigatebirds, gulls,[161] and skuas,[162] engage in
kleptoparasitism, stealing food items from other birds. Kleptoparasitism is thought to
be a supplement to food obtained by hunting, rather than a significant part of any
species' diet; a study of great frigatebirds stealing from masked boobies estimated that
the frigatebirds stole at most 40% of their food and on average stole only 5%.[163]
Other birds are scavengers; some of these, like vultures, are specialised carrion eaters,
while others, like gulls, corvids, or other birds of prey, are opportunists.[164]
Water is needed by many birds although their mode of excretion and lack of sweat
glands reduces the physiological demands.[165] Some desert birds can obtain their
water needs entirely from moisture in their food. Some have other adaptations such as
allowing their body temperature to rise, saving on moisture loss from evaporative
cooling or panting.[166] Seabirds can drink seawater and have salt glands inside the
head that eliminate excess salt out of the nostrils.[167]
Most birds scoop water in their beaks and raise their head to let water
run down the throat. Some species, especially of arid zones, belonging
to the pigeon, finch, mousebird, button-quail and bustard families are
capable of sucking up water without the need to tilt back their
heads.[168] Some desert birds depend on water sources and sandgrouse
are particularly well known for congregating daily at waterholes.
Nesting sandgrouse and many plovers carry water to their young by
wetting their belly feathers.[169] Some birds carry water for chicks at
the nest in their crop or regurgitate it along with food. The pigeon
family, flamingos and penguins have adaptations to produce a nutritive
fluid called crop milk that they provide to their chicks.[170]
Feathers, being critical to the survival of a bird, require maintenance. Apart from physical wear and tear, feathers
face the onslaught of fungi, ectoparasitic feather mites and bird lice.[171] The physical condition of feathers are
maintained by preening often with the application of secretions from the preen gland. Birds also bathe in water or
dust themselves. While some birds dip into shallow water, more aerial species may make aerial dips into water and
arboreal species often make use of dew or rain that collect on leaves. Birds of arid regions make use of loose soil to
dust-bathe. A behaviour termed as anting in which the bird encourages ants to run through their plumage is also
thought to help them reduce the ectoparasite load in feathers. Many species will spread out their wings and expose
them to direct sunlight and this too is thought to help in reducing fungal and ectoparasitic activity that may lead to
feather damage.[172][173]
Water and drinking
Feather care
A flock of Canada geese in V formation
The routes of satellite-tagged bar-tailed
godwits migrating north from New
Zealand. This species has the longest
known non-stop migration of any species,
up to 10,200 km (6,300 mi).
Many bird species migrate to take advantage of global differences of
seasonal temperatures, therefore optimising availability of food sources
and breeding habitat. These migrations vary among the different
groups. Many landbirds, shorebirds, and waterbirds undertake annual
long-distance migrations, usually triggered by the length of daylight as
well as weather conditions. These birds are characterised by a breeding
season spent in the temperate or polar regions and a non-breeding
season in the tropical regions or opposite hemisphere. Before
migration, birds substantially increase body fats and reserves and
reduce the size of some of their organs.[174][175]
Migration is highly demanding energetically, particularly as birds need to cross deserts and oceans without
refuelling. Landbirds have a flight range of around 2,500 km (1,600 mi) and shorebirds can fly up to 4,000 km
(2,500 mi),[77] although the bar-tailed godwit is capable of non-stop flights of up to 10,200 km (6,300 mi).[176]
Some seabirds undertake long migrations, with the longest annual migrations including those of Arctic terns, which
were recorded travelling an average of 70,900 km (44,100 mi) between their Arctic breeding grounds in Greenland
and Iceland and their wintering grounds in Antarctica, with one bird covering 81,600 km (50,700 mi),[177] and
sooty shearwaters, which nest in New Zealand and Chile and make annual round trips of 64,000 km (39,800 mi) to
their summer feeding grounds in the North Pacific off Japan, Alaska and California.[178] Other seabirds disperse
after breeding, travelling widely but having no set migration route. Albatrosses nesting in the Southern Ocean often
undertake circumpolar trips between breeding seasons.[179]
Some bird species undertake shorter migrations, travelling only as far
as is required to avoid bad weather or obtain food. Irruptive species
such as the boreal finches are one such group and can commonly be
found at a location in one year and absent the next. This type of
migration is normally associated with food availability.[180] Species
may also travel shorter distances over part of their range, with
individuals from higher latitudes travelling into the existing range of
conspecifics; others undertake partial migrations, where only a fraction
of the population, usually females and subdominant males,
migrates.[181] Partial migration can form a large percentage of the
migration behaviour of birds in some regions; in Australia, surveys
found that 44% of non-passerine birds and 32% of passerines were
partially migratory.[182]
Altitudinal migration is a form of short-distance migration in which
birds spend the breeding season at higher altitudes and move to lower
ones during suboptimal conditions. It is most often triggered by
temperature changes and usually occurs when the normal territories
also become inhospitable due to lack of food.[183] Some species may
also be nomadic, holding no fixed territory and moving according to weather and food availability. Parrots as a
family are overwhelmingly neither migratory nor sedentary but considered to either be dispersive, irruptive,
nomadic or undertake small and irregular migrations.[184]
The ability of birds to return to precise locations across vast distances has been known for some time; in an
experiment conducted in the 1950s, a Manx shearwater released in Boston in the United States returned to its
colony in Skomer, in Wales within 13 days, a distance of 5,150 km (3,200 mi).[185] Birds navigate during
migration using a variety of methods. For diurnal migrants, the sun is used to navigate by day, and a stellar
compass is used at night. Birds that use the sun compensate for the changing position of the sun during the day by
Migration
Bird song
Song of the house wren, a
common North American
songbird
Mimicry
A tooth-billed bowerbird
mimicking a spangled
drongo
Drumming
A woodpecker drumming
on wood
Problems playing these files? See
media help.
The startling display of the sunbittern
mimics a large predator.
the use of an internal clock.[77] Orientation with the stellar compass depends on the position of the constellations
surrounding Polaris.[186] These are backed up in some species by their ability to sense the Earth's geomagnetism
through specialised photoreceptors.[187]
Birds communicate primarily using visual and auditory signals. Signals can
be interspecific (between species) and intraspecific (within species).
Birds sometimes use plumage to assess and assert social dominance,[188] to
display breeding condition in sexually selected species, or to make
threatening displays, as in the sunbittern's mimicry of a large predator to
ward off hawks and protect young chicks.[189]
Visual communication among
birds may also involve
ritualised displays, which have
developed from non-signalling
actions such as preening, the
adjustments of feather position,
pecking, or other behaviour.
These displays may signal
aggression or submission or
may contribute to the formation
of pair-bonds.[77] The most
elaborate displays occur during
courtship, where "dances" are often formed from complex
combinations of many possible component movements;[190] males' breeding success may depend on the quality of
such displays.[191]
Bird calls and songs, which are produced in the syrinx, are the major means by which birds communicate with
sound. This communication can be very complex; some species can operate the two sides of the syrinx
independently, allowing the simultaneous production of two different songs.[105] Calls are used for a variety of
purposes, including mate attraction,[77] evaluation of potential mates,[192] bond formation, the claiming and
maintenance of territories,[77][193] the identification of other individuals (such as when parents look for chicks in
colonies or when mates reunite at the start of breeding season),[194] and the warning of other birds of potential
predators, sometimes with specific information about the nature of the threat.[195] Some birds also use mechanical
sounds for auditory communication. The Coenocorypha snipes of New Zealand drive air through their
feathers,[196] woodpeckers drum for long-distance communication,[197] and palm cockatoos use tools to drum.[198]
While some birds are essentially territorial or live in small family groups, other birds may form large flocks. The
principal benefits of flocking are safety in numbers and increased foraging efficiency.[77] Defence against
predators is particularly important in closed habitats like forests, where ambush predation is common and multiple
eyes can provide a valuable early warning system. This has led to the development of many mixed-species feeding
flocks, which are usually composed of small numbers of many species; these flocks provide safety in numbers but
increase potential competition for resources.[200] Costs of flocking include bullying of socially subordinate birds
by more dominant birds and the reduction of feeding efficiency in certain cases.[201] Some species have a mixed
system with breeding pairs maintaining territories, while unmated or young birds live in flocks where they secure
mates prior to finding territories.[202]
Communication0:000:00/ 0:00/ 0:000:000:00/ 0:00/ 0:000:000:00/ 0:00/ 0:00
Flocking and other associations
Red-billed queleas, the most numerous
species of wild bird,[199] form enormous
flocks – sometimes tens of thousands
strong.
Many birds, like this American flamingo,
tuck their head into their back when
sleeping.
Birds sometimes also form associations with non-avian species.
Plunge-diving seabirds associate with dolphins and tuna, which push
shoaling fish towards the surface.[203] Some species of hornbills have a
mutualistic relationship with dwarf mongooses, in which they forage
together and warn each other of nearby birds of prey and other
predators.[204]
The high metabolic rates of
birds during the active part
of the day is supplemented
by rest at other times.
Sleeping birds often use a
type of sleep known as
vigilant sleep, where periods of rest are interspersed with quick eye-
opening "peeks", allowing them to be sensitive to disturbances and
enable rapid escape from threats.[205] Swifts are believed to be able to
sleep in flight and radar observations suggest that they orient
themselves to face the wind in their roosting flight.[206] It has been
suggested that there may be certain kinds of sleep which are possible
even when in flight.[207]
Some birds have also demonstrated the capacity to fall into slow-wave sleep one hemisphere of the brain at a time.
The birds tend to exercise this ability depending upon its position relative to the outside of the flock. This may
allow the eye opposite the sleeping hemisphere to remain vigilant for predators by viewing the outer margins of the
flock. This adaptation is also known from marine mammals.[208] Communal roosting is common because it lowers
the loss of body heat and decreases the risks associated with predators.[209] Roosting sites are often chosen with
regard to thermoregulation and safety.[210] Unusual mobile roost sites include large herbivores on the African
savanna that are used by oxpeckers.[211]
Many sleeping birds bend their heads over their backs and tuck their bills in their back feathers, although others
place their beaks among their breast feathers. Many birds rest on one leg, while some may pull up their legs into
their feathers, especially in cold weather. Perching birds have a tendon-locking mechanism that helps them hold on
to the perch when they are asleep. Many ground birds, such as quails and pheasants, roost in trees. A few parrots of
the genus Loriculus roost hanging upside down.[212] Some hummingbirds go into a nightly state of torpor
accompanied with a reduction of their metabolic rates.[213] This physiological adaptation shows in nearly a
hundred other species, including owlet-nightjars, nightjars, and woodswallows. One species, the common poorwill,
even enters a state of hibernation.[214] Birds do not have sweat glands, but can lose water directly through the skin,
and they may cool themselves by moving to shade, standing in water, panting, increasing their surface area,
fluttering their throat or using special behaviours like urohidrosis to cool themselves.[215][216]
95 per cent of bird species are socially monogamous. These species pair for at least the length of the breeding
season or—in some cases—for several years or until the death of one mate.[218] Monogamy allows for both
paternal care and biparental care, which is especially important for species in which care from both the female and
the male parent is required in order to successfully rear a brood.[219] Among many socially monogamous species,
Resting and roosting
Breeding
Social systems
Like others of its family, the male
Raggiana bird-of-paradise has elaborate
breeding plumage used to impress
females.[217]
extra-pair copulation (infidelity) is common.[220] Such behaviour
typically occurs between dominant males and females paired with
subordinate males, but may also be the result of forced copulation in
ducks and other anatids.[221]
For females, possible benefits of extra-pair copulation include getting
better genes for her offspring and insuring against the possibility of
infertility in her mate.[222] Males of species that engage in extra-pair
copulations will closely guard their mates to ensure the parentage of
the offspring that they raise.[223]
Other mating systems, including polygyny, polyandry, polygamy,
polygynandry, and promiscuity, also occur.[77] Polygamous breeding
systems arise when females are able to raise broods without the help of
males.[77] Mating systems vary across bird families[224] but variations
within species are thought to be driven by environmental
conditions.[225] A unique system is the formation of trios where a third
individual is allowed by a breeding pair temporarily into the territory to
assist with brood raising thereby leading to higher fitness.[226][193]
Breeding usually involves some form of courtship display, typically
performed by the male.[227] Most displays are rather simple and
involve some type of song. Some displays, however, are quite elaborate. Depending on the species, these may
include wing or tail drumming, dancing, aerial flights, or communal lekking. Females are generally the ones that
drive partner selection,[228] although in the polyandrous phalaropes, this is reversed: plainer males choose brightly
coloured females.[229] Courtship feeding, billing and allopreening are commonly performed between partners,
generally after the birds have paired and mated.[230]
Homosexual behaviour has been observed in males or females in numerous species of birds, including copulation,
pair-bonding, and joint parenting of chicks.[231] Over 130 avian species around the world engage in sexual
interactions between the same sex or homosexual behaviours. "Same-sex courtship activities may involve elaborate
displays, synchronised dances, gift-giving ceremonies, or behaviours at specific display areas including bowers,
arenas, or leks."[232]
Many birds actively defend a territory from others of the same species during the breeding season; maintenance of
territories protects the food source for their chicks. Species that are unable to defend feeding territories, such as
seabirds and swifts, often breed in colonies instead; this is thought to offer protection from predators. Colonial
breeders defend small nesting sites, and competition between and within species for nesting sites can be
intense.[233]
All birds lay amniotic eggs with hard shells made mostly of calcium carbonate.[77] Hole and burrow nesting
species tend to lay white or pale eggs, while open nesters lay camouflaged eggs. There are many exceptions to this
pattern, however; the ground-nesting nightjars have pale eggs, and camouflage is instead provided by their
plumage. Species that are victims of brood parasites have varying egg colours to improve the chances of spotting a
parasite's egg, which forces female parasites to match their eggs to those of their hosts.[234]
Bird eggs are usually laid in a nest. Most species create somewhat elaborate nests, which can be cups, domes,
plates, mounds, or burrows.[235] Some bird nests can be a simple scrape, with minimal or no lining; most seabird
and wader nests are no more than a scrape on the ground. Most birds build nests in sheltered, hidden areas to avoid
predation, but large or colonial birds—which are more capable of defence—may build more open nests. During
Territories, nesting and incubation
A bird nest which fell from a tree.
Male golden-backed weavers construct
elaborate suspended nests out of grass. Nest of an eastern phoebe that has been
parasitised by a brown-headed cowbird
nest construction, some species seek out plant matter from plants with
parasite-reducing toxins to improve chick survival,[236] and feathers
are often used for nest insulation.[235] Some bird species have no nests;
the cliff-nesting common guillemot lays its eggs on bare rock, and
male emperor penguins keep eggs between their body and feet. The
absence of nests is especially prevalent in open habitat ground-nesting
species where any addition of nest material would make the nest more
conspicuous. Many ground nesting birds lay a clutch of eggs that hatch
synchronously, with precocial chicks led away from the nests
(nidifugous) by their parents soon after hatching.[237]
Incubation, which regulates temperature for chick development,
usually begins after the last egg has been laid.[77] In monogamous
species incubation duties are often shared, whereas in polygamous
species one parent is wholly responsible for incubation. Warmth from
parents passes to the eggs through brood patches, areas of bare skin on
the abdomen or breast of the incubating birds. Incubation can be an
energetically demanding
process; adult albatrosses,
for instance, lose as much
as 83 grams (2.9 oz) of
body weight per day of
incubation.[238] The
warmth for the incubation
of the eggs of megapodes
comes from the sun,
decaying vegetation or
volcanic sources.[239]
Incubation periods range
from 10 days (in
woodpeckers, cuckoos and passerine birds) to over 80 days (in
albatrosses and kiwis).[77]
The diversity of characteristics of birds is great, sometimes even in closely related species. Several avian
characteristics are compared in the table below.[240][241]
Species Adult weight
(grams)
Incubation
(days)
Clutches
(per year) Clutch size
Ruby-throated hummingbird (Archilochus colubris) 3 13 2.0 2
House sparrow (Passer domesticus) 25 11 4.5 5
Greater roadrunner (Geococcyx californianus) 376 20 1.5 4
Turkey vulture (Cathartes aura) 2,200 39 1.0 2
Laysan albatross (Phoebastria immutabilis) 3,150 64 1.0 1
Magellanic penguin (Spheniscus magellanicus) 4,000 40 1.0 1
Golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) 4,800 40 1.0 2
Wild turkey (Meleagris gallopavo) 6,050 28 1.0 11
Altricial chicks of a white-breasted
woodswallow
A female calliope hummingbird feeding
fully grown chicks
At the time of their hatching, chicks range in development from helpless to independent, depending on their
species. Helpless chicks are termed altricial, and tend to be born small, blind, immobile and naked; chicks that are
mobile and feathered upon hatching are termed precocial. Altricial chicks need help thermoregulating and must be
brooded for longer than precocial chicks. The young of many bird species do not precisely fit into either the
precocial or altricial category, having some aspects of each and thus fall somewhere on an "altricial-precocial
spectrum".[242] Chicks at neither extreme but favouring one or the other may be termed semi-precocial[243] or
semi-altricial.[244]
The length and nature of parental care varies widely amongst different
orders and species. At one extreme, parental care in megapodes ends at
hatching; the newly hatched chick digs itself out of the nest mound
without parental assistance and can fend for itself immediately.[245] At
the other extreme, many seabirds have extended periods of parental
care, the longest being that of the great frigatebird, whose chicks take
up to six months to fledge and are fed by the parents for up to an
additional 14 months.[246] The chick guard stage describes the period
of breeding during which one of the adult birds is permanently present
at the nest after chicks have hatched. The main purpose of the guard
stage is to aid offspring to thermoregulate and protect them from
predation.[247]
In some species, both parents care for nestlings and fledglings; in
others, such care is the responsibility of only one sex. In some species,
other members of the same species—usually close relatives of the
breeding pair, such as offspring from previous broods—will help with
the raising of the young.[248] Such alloparenting is particularly
common among the Corvida, which includes such birds as the true
crows, Australian magpie and fairy-wrens,[249] but has been observed
in species as different as the rifleman and red kite. Among most groups
of animals, male parental care is rare. In birds, however, it is quite
common—more so than in any other vertebrate class.[77] Although
territory and nest site defence, incubation, and chick feeding are often
shared tasks, there is sometimes a division of labour in which one mate
undertakes all or most of a particular duty.[250]
The point at which chicks fledge varies dramatically. The chicks of the Synthliboramphus murrelets, like the
ancient murrelet, leave the nest the night after they hatch, following their parents out to sea, where they are raised
away from terrestrial predators.[251] Some other species, such as ducks, move their chicks away from the nest at an
early age. In most species, chicks leave the nest just before, or soon after, they are able to fly. The amount of
parental care after fledging varies; albatross chicks leave the nest on their own and receive no further help, while
other species continue some supplementary feeding after fledging.[252] Chicks may also follow their parents during
their first migration.[253]
Brood parasitism, in which an egg-layer leaves her eggs with another individual's brood, is more common among
birds than any other type of organism.[254] After a parasitic bird lays her eggs in another bird's nest, they are often
accepted and raised by the host at the expense of the host's own brood. Brood parasites may be either obligate
brood parasites, which must lay their eggs in the nests of other species because they are incapable of raising their
own young, or non-obligate brood parasites, which sometimes lay eggs in the nests of conspecifics to increase
Parental care and fledging
Brood parasites
Reed warbler raising a
common cuckoo, a brood
parasite
The peacock tail in flight, the classic example of a
Fisherian runaway
their reproductive output even though they could have raised their own
young.[255] One hundred bird species, including honeyguides, icterids, and
ducks, are obligate parasites, though the most famous are the cuckoos.[254] Some
brood parasites are adapted to hatch before their host's young, which allows
them to destroy the host's eggs by pushing them out of the nest or to kill the
host's chicks; this ensures that all food brought to the nest will be fed to the
parasitic chicks.[256]
Birds have evolved a variety of mating behaviours, with the peacock tail being
perhaps the most famous example of sexual selection and the Fisherian runaway.
Commonly occurring sexual dimorphisms such as size and colour differences
are energetically costly attributes that signal competitive breeding situations.[257]
Many types of avian sexual selection have been identified; intersexual selection,
also known as female choice; and intrasexual competition, where individuals of
the more abundant sex compete with each other for the privilege to mate.
Sexually selected traits often evolve to become more
pronounced in competitive breeding situations until the
trait begins to limit the individual's fitness. Conflicts
between an individual fitness and signalling adaptations
ensure that sexually selected ornaments such as plumage
colouration and courtship behaviour are "honest" traits.
Signals must be costly to ensure that only good-quality
individuals can present these exaggerated sexual
ornaments and behaviours.[258]
Inbreeding causes early death (inbreeding depression) in
the zebra finch Taeniopygia guttata.[259] Embryo
survival (that is, hatching success of fertile eggs) was significantly lower for sib-sib mating pairs than for unrelated
pairs.[260]
Darwin's finch Geospiza scandens experiences inbreeding depression (reduced survival of offspring) and the
magnitude of this effect is influenced by environmental conditions such as low food availability.[261]
Incestuous matings by the purple-crowned fairy wren Malurus coronatus result in severe fitness costs due to
inbreeding depression (greater than 30% reduction in hatchability of eggs).[262] Females paired with related males
may undertake extra pair matings (see Promiscuity#Other animals for 90% frequency in avian species) that can
reduce the negative effects of inbreeding. However, there are ecological and demographic constraints on extra pair
matings. Nevertheless, 43% of broods produced by incestuously paired females contained extra pair young.[262]
Inbreeding depression occurs in the great tit (Parus major) when the offspring produced as a result of a mating
between close relatives show reduced fitness. In natural populations of Parus major, inbreeding is avoided by
dispersal of individuals from their birthplace, which reduces the chance of mating with a close relative.[263]
Southern pied babblers Turdoides bicolor appear to avoid inbreeding in two ways. The first is through dispersal,
and the second is by avoiding familiar group members as mates.[264]
Sexual selection
Inbreeding depression
Inbreeding avoidance
Gran Canaria blue chaffinch, an example
of a bird highly specialised in its habitat,
in this case in the Canarian pine forests
Cooperative breeding in birds typically occurs when offspring, usually males, delay dispersal from their natal
group in order to remain with the family to help rear younger kin.[265] Female offspring rarely stay at home,
dispersing over distances that allow them to breed independently, or to join unrelated groups. In general,
inbreeding is avoided because it leads to a reduction in progeny fitness (inbreeding depression) due largely to the
homozygous expression of deleterious recessive alleles.[266] Cross-fertilisation between unrelated individuals
ordinarily leads to the masking of deleterious recessive alleles in progeny.[267][268]
Birds occupy a wide range of ecological positions.[199] While some
birds are generalists, others are highly specialised in their habitat or
food requirements. Even within a single habitat, such as a forest, the
niches occupied by different species of birds vary, with some species
feeding in the forest canopy, others beneath the canopy, and still others
on the forest floor. Forest birds may be insectivores, frugivores, or
nectarivores. Aquatic birds generally feed by fishing, plant eating, and
piracy or kleptoparasitism. Many grassland birds are granivores. Birds
of prey specialise in hunting mammals or other birds, while vultures
are specialised scavengers. Birds are also preyed upon by a range of
mammals including a few avivorous bats.[269] A wide range of endo-
and ectoparasites depend on birds and some parasites that are
transmitted from parent to young have co-evolved and show host-
specificity.[270]
Some nectar-feeding birds are important pollinators, and many frugivores play a key role in seed dispersal.[271]
Plants and pollinating birds often coevolve,[272] and in some cases a flower's primary pollinator is the only species
capable of reaching its nectar.[273]
Birds are often important to island ecology. Birds have frequently reached islands that mammals have not; on those
islands, birds may fulfil ecological roles typically played by larger animals. For example, in New Zealand nine
species of moa were important browsers, as are the kererū and kōkako today.[271] Today the plants of New Zealand
retain the defensive adaptations evolved to protect them from the extinct moa.[274]
Many birds act as ecosystem engineers through the construction of nests, which provide important microhabitats
and food for hundreds of species of invertebrates.[275][276] Nesting seabirds may affect the ecology of islands and
surrounding seas, principally through the concentration of large quantities of guano, which may enrich the local
soil[277] and the surrounding seas.[278]
A wide variety of avian ecology field methods, including counts, nest monitoring, and capturing and marking, are
used for researching avian ecology.[279]
Since birds are highly visible and common animals, humans have had a relationship with them since the dawn of
man.[280] Sometimes, these relationships are mutualistic, like the cooperative honey-gathering among honeyguides
and African peoples such as the Borana.[281] Other times, they may be commensal, as when species such as the
house sparrow[282] have benefited from human activities. Several species have reconciled to habits of farmers who
practice traditional farming. Examples include the Sarus Crane that begins nesting in India when farmers flood the
fields in anticipation of rains,[283] and the woolly-necked storks that have taken to nesting on a short tree grown for
Ecology
Relationship with humans
Industrial farming of chickens
The use of cormorants by
Asian fishermen is in steep
decline but survives in some
areas as a tourist attraction.
agroforestry beside fields and canals.[284] Several bird species have
become commercially significant agricultural pests,[285] and some pose
an aviation hazard.[286] Human activities can also be detrimental, and
have threatened numerous bird species with extinction (hunting, avian
lead poisoning, pesticides, roadkill, wind turbine kills[287] and
predation by pet cats and dogs are common causes of death for
birds).[288]
Birds can act as vectors for spreading diseases such as psittacosis,
salmonellosis, campylobacteriosis, mycobacteriosis (avian
tuberculosis), avian influenza (bird flu), giardiasis, and
cryptosporidiosis over long distances. Some of these are zoonotic
diseases that can also be transmitted to humans.[289]
Domesticated birds raised for meat and eggs, called poultry, are the largest
source of animal protein eaten by humans; in 2003, 76 million tons of poultry
and 61 million tons of eggs were produced worldwide.[290] Chickens account for
much of human poultry consumption, though domesticated turkeys, ducks, and
geese are also relatively common.[291] Many species of birds are also hunted for
meat. Bird hunting is primarily a recreational activity except in extremely
undeveloped areas. The most important birds hunted in North and South
America are waterfowl; other widely hunted birds include pheasants, wild
turkeys, quail, doves, partridge, grouse, snipe, and woodcock.[292]
Muttonbirding is also popular in Australia and New Zealand.[293] Although
some hunting, such as that of muttonbirds, may be sustainable, hunting has led
to the extinction or endangerment of dozens of species.[294]
Other commercially valuable products from birds include feathers (especially
the down of geese and ducks), which are used as insulation in clothing and
bedding, and seabird faeces (guano), which is a valuable source of phosphorus
and nitrogen. The War of the Pacific, sometimes called the Guano War, was
fought in part over the control of guano deposits.[295]
Birds have been domesticated by humans both as pets and for practical purposes. Colourful birds, such as parrots
and mynas, are bred in captivity or kept as pets, a practice that has led to the illegal trafficking of some endangered
species.[296] Falcons and cormorants have long been used for hunting and fishing, respectively. Messenger
pigeons, used since at least 1 AD, remained important as recently as World War II. Today, such activities are more
common either as hobbies, for entertainment and tourism.[297]
Amateur bird enthusiasts (called birdwatchers, twitchers or, more commonly, birders) number in the millions.[298]
Many homeowners erect bird feeders near their homes to attract various species. Bird feeding has grown into a
multimillion-dollar industry; for example, an estimated 75% of households in Britain provide food for birds at
some point during the winter.[299]
Birds play prominent and diverse roles in religion and mythology. In religion, birds may serve as either messengers
or priests and leaders for a deity, such as in the Cult of Makemake, in which the Tangata manu of Easter Island
served as chiefs[300] or as attendants, as in the case of Hugin and Munin, the two common ravens who whispered
Economic importance
In religion and mythology
The 3 of Birds by the Master of
the Playing Cards, 15th-
century Germany
Painted tiles with design of birds from
Qajar dynasty, Iran
news into the ears of the Norse god Odin. In several civilisations of ancient Italy,
particularly Etruscan and Roman religion, priests were involved in augury, or
interpreting the words of birds while the "auspex" (from which the word
"auspicious" is derived) watched their activities to foretell events.[301]
They may also serve as religious symbols, as when Jonah (Hebrew: יונה, dove)
embodied the fright, passivity, mourning, and beauty traditionally associated
with doves.[302] Birds have themselves been deified, as in the case of the
common peacock, which is perceived as Mother Earth by the people of southern
India.[303] In the ancient world, doves were used as symbols of the
Mesopotamian goddess Inanna (later known as Ishtar),[304][305] the Canaanite
mother goddess Asherah,[304][305][306] and the Greek goddess
Aphrodite.[304][305][307][308][309] In ancient Greece, Athena, the goddess of
wisdom and patron deity of the city of Athens, had a little owl as her
symbol.[310][311][312] In religious images preserved from the Inca and Tiwanaku
empires, birds are depicted in the process of transgressing boundaries between
earthly and underground spiritual realms.[313] Indigenous peoples of the central
Andes maintain legends of birds passing to and from metaphysical worlds.[313]
Birds have featured in culture and art since prehistoric times, when
they were represented in early cave painting[314] and carvings.[315]
Some birds have been perceived as monsters, including the
mythological Roc and the Māori's legendary Pouākai, a giant bird
capable of snatching humans.[316] Birds were later used as symbols of
power, as in the magnificent Peacock Throne of the Mughal and
Persian emperors.[317] With the advent of scientific interest in birds,
many paintings of birds were commissioned for books.[318][319]
Among the most famous of these bird artists was John James Audubon,
whose paintings of North American birds were a great commercial
success in Europe and who later lent his name to the National Audubon Society.[320] Birds are also important
figures in poetry; for example, Homer incorporated nightingales into his Odyssey, and Catullus used a sparrow as
an erotic symbol in his Catullus 2.[321] The relationship between an albatross and a sailor is the central theme of
Samuel Taylor Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, which led to the use of the term as a metaphor for a
'burden'.[322] Other English metaphors derive from birds; vulture funds and vulture investors, for instance, take
their name from the scavenging vulture.[323] Aircraft, particularly military aircraft, are frequently named after
birds. The predatory nature of raptors make them popular choices for fighter aircraft such as the F-16 Fighting
Falcon and the Harrier Jump Jet, while the names of seabirds may be chosen for aircraft primarily used by naval
forces such as the HU-16 Albatross and the V-22 Osprey.
Perceptions of bird species vary across cultures. Owls are associated with bad luck, witchcraft, and death in parts
of Africa,[324] but are regarded as wise across much of Europe.[325] Hoopoes were considered sacred in Ancient
Egypt and symbols of virtue in Persia, but were thought of as thieves across much of Europe and harbingers of war
in Scandinavia.[326] In heraldry, birds, especially eagles, often appear in coats of arms[327] In vexillology, birds are
a popular choice on flags. Birds feature in the flag designs of 17 countries and numerous subnational entities and
territories.[328] Birds are used by nations to symbolise a country's identity and heritage, with 91 countries officially
recognising a national bird. Birds of prey are highly represented, though some nations have chosen other species of
birds with parrots being popular among smaller, tropical nations.[329]
In culture and folklore
The flag of Dominica prominently
features the Sisserou Parrot, its national
bird.
The California condor once
numbered only 22 birds, but
conservation measures have
raised that to over 500 today.
In music, birdsong has influenced composers and musicians in several
ways: they can be inspired by birdsong; they can intentionally imitate
bird song in a composition, as Vivaldi, Messiaen, and Beethoven did,
along with many later composers; they can incorporate recordings of
birds into their works, as Ottorino Respighi first did; or like Beatrice
Harrison and David Rothenberg, they can duet with
birds.[330][331][332][333]
A 2023 archaeological excavation of a 10,000-year-old site in Israel
yielded hollow wing bones of coots and ducks with perforations made
on the side that are thought to have allowed them to be used as flutes or whistles possibly used by Natufian people
to lure birds of prey.[334]
Human activities have caused population decreases or extinction in many bird
species. Over a hundred bird species have gone extinct in historical times,[335]
although the most dramatic human-caused avian extinctions, eradicating an
estimated 750–1800 species, occurred during the human colonisation of
Melanesian, Polynesian, and Micronesian islands.[336] Many bird populations
are declining worldwide, with 1,227 species listed as threatened by BirdLife
International and the IUCN in 2009.[337][338] There have been long-term
declines in North American bird populations, with an estimated loss of 2.9
billion breeding adults, about 30% of the total, since 1970.[339][340]
The most commonly cited human threat to birds is habitat loss.[341] Other threats
include overhunting, accidental mortality due to collisions with buildings or
vehicles, long-line fishing bycatch,[342] pollution (including oil spills and
pesticide use),[343] competition and predation from nonnative invasive
species,[344] and climate change.
Governments and conservation groups work to protect birds, either by passing
laws that preserve and restore bird habitat or by establishing captive populations
for reintroductions. Such projects have produced some successes; one study estimated that conservation efforts
saved 16 species of bird that would otherwise have gone extinct between 1994 and 2004, including the California
condor and Norfolk parakeet.[345]
Human activities have allowed the expansion of a few temperate area species, such as the barn swallow and
European starling. In the tropics and sub-tropics, relatively more species are expanding due to human activities,
particularly due to the spread of crops such as rice whose expansion in south Asia has benefitted at least 64 bird
species, though may have harmed many more species.[346]
Biodiversity loss
Breeding behaviors of birds
Climate change and birds
Glossary of bird terms
In music
Threats and conservation
See also
List of individual birds
Ornithology
List of bird genera
1. Field, Daniel J.; Benito, Juan; Chen, Albert; Jagt, John W. M.; Ksepka, Daniel T. (March 2020). "Late
Cretaceous neornithine from Europe illuminates the origins of crown birds" (https://www.repository.ca
m.ac.uk/handle/1810/303639). Nature. 579 (7799): 397–401. Bibcode:2020Natur.579..397F (https://
ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020Natur.579..397F). doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2096-0 (https://doi.org/1
0.1038%2Fs41586-020-2096-0). PMID 32188952 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32188952).
2. De Pietri, Vanesa L.; Scofield, R. Paul; Zelenkov, Nikita; Boles, Walter E.; Worthy, Trevor H.
(February 2016). "The unexpected survival of an ancient lineage of anseriform birds into the
Neogene of Australia: the youngest record of Presbyornithidae" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ar
ticles/PMC4785986). Royal Society Open Science. 3 (2) 150635. Bibcode:2016RSOS....350635D (ht
tps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016RSOS....350635D). doi:10.1098/rsos.150635 (https://doi.org/1
0.1098%2Frsos.150635). PMC 4785986 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4785986).
PMID 26998335 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26998335).
3. Brands, Sheila (14 August 2008). "Systema Naturae 2000 / Classification, Class Aves" (http://taxono
micon.taxonomy.nl/TaxonTree.aspx?id=80129&tree=0.1). Project: The Taxonomicon. Retrieved
11 June 2012.
4. Claramunt, S.; Cracraft, J. (2015). "A new time tree reveals Earth history's imprint on the evolution of
modern birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4730849). Sci Adv. 1 (11) e1501005.
Bibcode:2015SciA....1E1005C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015SciA....1E1005C).
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1501005 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fsciadv.1501005). PMC 4730849 (https://ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4730849). PMID 26824065 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26
824065).
5. Brocklehurst, Neil; Field, Daniel J. (2024). "Tip dating and Bayes factors provide insight into the
divergences of crown bird clades across the end-Cretaceous mass extinction" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10865003). Proceedings. Biological Sciences. 291 (2016) 20232618.
doi:10.1098/rspb.2023.2618 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2023.2618). PMC 10865003 (https://w
ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10865003). PMID 38351798 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
38351798).
6. del Hoyo, Josep; Andy Elliott; Jordi Sargatal (1992). Handbook of Birds of the World, Volume 1:
Ostrich to Ducks. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-10-5.
7. Linnaeus, Carolus (1758). Systema naturae per regna tria naturae, secundum classes, ordines,
genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis. Tomus I. Editio decima, reformata
(in Latin). Holmiae. (Laurentii Salvii). p. 824.
8. Ruggiero, Michael A.; Gordon, Dennis P.; Orrell, Thomas M.; Bailly, Nicolas; Bourgoin, Thierry;
Brusca, Richard C.; Cavalier-Smith, Thomas; Guiry, Michael D.; Kirk, Paul M. (11 June 2015).
"Correction: A Higher Level Classification of All Living Organisms" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pm
c/articles/PMC5159126). PLOS ONE. 10 (6) e0130114. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1030114R (https://ui.a
dsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015PLoSO..1030114R). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0130114 (https://doi.org/
10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0130114). PMC 5159126 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5
159126). PMID 26068874 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26068874).
9. Livezey, Bradley C.; Zusi, RL (January 2007). "Higher-order phylogeny of modern birds (Theropoda,
Aves: Neornithes) based on comparative anatomy. II. Analysis and discussion" (https://www.ncbi.nl
m.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2517308). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society. 149 (1): 1–95.
doi:10.1111/j.1096-3642.2006.00293.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1096-3642.2006.00293.x).
PMC 2517308 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2517308). PMID 18784798 (https://pu
bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18784798).
10. Padian, Kevin; Philip J. Currie (1997). "Bird Origins". Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs. San Diego:
Academic Press. pp. 41–96. ISBN 0-12-226810-5.
References
11. Gauthier, Jacques (1986). "Saurischian monophyly and the origin of birds". In Padian, Kevin (ed.).
The Origin of Birds and the Evolution of Flight (https://biostor.org/reference/110202). Memoirs of the
California Academy of Science. Vol. 8. San Francisco, CA: Published by California Academy of
Sciences. pp. 1–55. ISBN 0-940228-14-9.
12. Gauthier, J.; de Queiroz, K. (2001). "Feathered dinosaurs, flying dinosaurs, crown dinosaurs, and the
name Aves". In Gauthier, J. A.; Gall, L. F. (eds.). New perspectives on the origin and early evolution
of birds: proceedings of the International Symposium in Honor of John H. Ostrom. New Haven, CT:
Peabody Museum of Natural History, Yale University. pp. 7–41.
13. Godefroit, Pascal; Andrea Cau; Hu Dong-Yu; François Escuillié; Wu Wenhao; Gareth Dyke (2013).
"A Jurassic avialan dinosaur from China resolves the early phylogenetic history of birds". Nature. 498
(7454): 359–362. Bibcode:2013Natur.498..359G (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013Natur.498..
359G). doi:10.1038/nature12168 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature12168). PMID 23719374 (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23719374).
14. Cau, Andrea (2018). "The assembly of the avian body plan: a 160-million-year long process" (http://p
aleoitalia.org/media/u/archives/01_Cau_2018_BSPI_571.pdf) (PDF). Bollettino della Società
Paleontologica Italiana. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180505065903/http://paleoitalia.org/
media/u/archives/01_Cau_2018_BSPI_571.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 5 May 2018.
15. Weishampel, David B.; Dodson, Peter; Osmólska, Halszka, eds. (2004). The Dinosauria
(Second ed.). University of California Press. pp. 861 pp.
16. Senter, P. (2007). "A new look at the phylogeny of Coelurosauria (Dinosauria: Theropoda)". Journal
of Systematic Palaeontology. 5 (4): 429–463. Bibcode:2007JSPal...5..429S (https://ui.adsabs.harvar
d.edu/abs/2007JSPal...5..429S). doi:10.1017/S1477201907002143 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS14
77201907002143).
17. Maryańska, Teresa; Osmólska, Halszka; Wolsan, Mieczysław (2002). "Avialan status for
Oviraptorosauria". Acta Palaeontologica Polonica.
18. Gauthier, J. (1986). "Saurischian monophyly and the origin of birds". In Padian, K. (ed.). The origin of
birds and the evolution of flight. San Francisco, California: Mem. Calif. Acad. Sci. pp. 1–55.
19. Lee, Michael S.Y.; Spencer, Patrick S. (1997). "Crown-Clades, Key Characters and Taxonomic
Stability: When is an Amniote Not an Amniote?". Amniote Origins. pp. 61–84. doi:10.1016/B978-
012676460-4/50004-4 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FB978-012676460-4%2F50004-4). ISBN 978-0-12-
676460-4.
20. Cau, Andrea; Brougham, Tom; Naish, Darren (2015). "The phylogenetic affinities of the bizarre Late
Cretaceous Romanian theropod Balaur bondoc(Dinosauria, Maniraptora): Dromaeosaurid or
flightless bird?" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4476167). PeerJ. 3 e1032.
Bibcode:2015PeerJ...3e1032C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015PeerJ...3e1032C).
doi:10.7717/peerj.1032 (https://doi.org/10.7717%2Fpeerj.1032). PMC 4476167 (https://www.ncbi.nl
m.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4476167). PMID 26157616 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26157616).
21. Plotnick, Roy E.; Theodor, Jessica M.; Holtz, Thomas R. (24 September 2015). "Jurassic Pork: What
Could a Jewish Time Traveler Eat?" (https://doi.org/10.1186%2Fs12052-015-0047-2). Evolution:
Education and Outreach. 8 (1): 17. doi:10.1186/s12052-015-0047-2 (https://doi.org/10.1186%2Fs12
052-015-0047-2). hdl:1903/27622 (https://hdl.handle.net/1903%2F27622).
22. Prum, Richard O. (19 December 2008). "Who's Your Daddy?" (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1
168808). Science. 322 (5909): 1799–1800. doi:10.1126/science.1168808 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2
Fscience.1168808). PMID 19095929 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19095929).
23. Paul, Gregory S. (2002). "Looking for the True Bird Ancestor". Dinosaurs of the Air: The Evolution
and Loss of Flight in Dinosaurs and Birds (https://archive.org/details/dinosaursofairev0000paul).
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 171 (https://archive.org/details/dinosaursofairev0000
paul/page/171)–224. ISBN 0-8018-6763-0.
24. Norell, Mark; Mick Ellison (2005). Unearthing the Dragon: The Great Feathered Dinosaur Discovery
(https://archive.org/details/unearthingdragon00mark). New York: Pi Press. ISBN 0-13-186266-9.
25. Borenstein, Seth (31 July 2014). "Study traces dinosaur evolution into early birds" (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20140808042331/http://apnews.excite.com/article/20140731/us-sci-shrinking-dinosaurs-a
5c053f221.html). Associated Press. Archived from the original (http://apnews.excite.com/article/2014
0731/us-sci-shrinking-dinosaurs-a5c053f221.html) on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 3 August 2014.
26. Lee, Michael S. Y.; Cau, Andrea; Naish, Darren; Dyke, Gareth J. (1 August 2014). "Sustained
miniaturization and anatomical innovation in the dinosaurian ancestors of birds". Science. 345
(6196): 562–566. Bibcode:2014Sci...345..562L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014Sci...345..56
2L). doi:10.1126/science.1252243 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1252243). PMID 25082702 (h
ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25082702).
27. Li, Q.; Gao, K.-Q.; Vinther, J.; Shawkey, M. D.; Clarke, J. A.; d'Alba, L.; Meng, Q.; Briggs, D. E. G. &
Prum, R. O. (2010). "Plumage color patterns of an extinct dinosaur" (http://doc.rero.ch/record/21039
4/files/PAL_E4402.pdf) (PDF). Science. 327 (5971): 1369–1372. Bibcode:2010Sci...327.1369L (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010Sci...327.1369L). doi:10.1126/science.1186290 (https://doi.org/1
0.1126%2Fscience.1186290). PMID 20133521 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20133521).
28. Xing Xu; Hailu You; Kai Du; Fenglu Han (28 July 2011). "An Archaeopteryx-like theropod from China
and the origin of Avialae". Nature. 475 (7357): 465–470. doi:10.1038/nature10288 (https://doi.org/10.
1038%2Fnature10288). PMID 21796204 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21796204).
29. Turner, Alan H.; Pol, D.; Clarke, J. A.; Erickson, G. M.; Norell, M. A. (7 September 2007). "A basal
dromaeosaurid and size evolution preceding avian flight" (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.11440
66). Science. 317 (5843): 1378–1381. Bibcode:2007Sci...317.1378T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/a
bs/2007Sci...317.1378T). doi:10.1126/science.1144066 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.114406
6). PMID 17823350 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17823350).
30. Xu, X.; Zhou, Z.; Wang, X.; Kuang, X.; Zhang, F.; Du, X. (23 January 2003). "Four-winged dinosaurs
from China" (http://doc.rero.ch/record/15275/files/PAL_E2574.pdf) (PDF). Nature. 421 (6921): 335–
340. Bibcode:2003Natur.421..335X (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003Natur.421..335X).
doi:10.1038/nature01342 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature01342). PMID 12540892 (https://pubme
d.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12540892).
31. Luiggi, Christina (July 2011). "On the Origin of Birds" (https://web.archive.org/web/20120616171500/
http://the-scientist.com/2011/07/27/on-the-origin-of-birds/). The Scientist. Archived from the original
(http://the-scientist.com/2011/07/27/on-the-origin-of-birds) on 16 June 2012. Retrieved 11 June
2012.
32. Mayr, G.; Pohl, B.; Hartman, S.; Peters, D. S. (January 2007). "The tenth skeletal specimen of
Archaeopteryx" (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1096-3642.2006.00245.x). Zoological Journal of the
Linnean Society. 149 (1): 97–116. doi:10.1111/j.1096-3642.2006.00245.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2
Fj.1096-3642.2006.00245.x).
33. Ivanov, M.; Hrdlickova, S.; Gregorova, R. (2001). The Complete Encyclopedia of Fossils.
Netherlands: Rebo Publishers. p. 312.
34. Benton, Michael J.; Dhouailly, Danielle; Jiang, Baoyu; McNamara, Maria (September 2019). "The
Early Origin of Feathers". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 34 (9): 856–869.
Bibcode:2019TEcoE..34..856B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019TEcoE..34..856B).
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2019.04.018 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tree.2019.04.018). hdl:10468/8068 (http
s://hdl.handle.net/10468%2F8068). PMID 31164250 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31164250).
35. Zheng, X.; Zhou, Z.; Wang, X.; Zhang, F.; Zhang, X.; Wang, Y.; Wei, G.; Wang, S.; Xu, X. (15 March
2013). "Hind Wings in Basal Birds and the Evolution of Leg Feathers". Science. 339 (6125): 1309–
1312. Bibcode:2013Sci...339.1309Z (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013Sci...339.1309Z).
doi:10.1126/science.1228753 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1228753). PMID 23493711 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23493711).
36. Chiappe, Luis M. (2007). Glorified Dinosaurs: The Origin and Early Evolution of Birds. Sydney:
University of New South Wales Press. ISBN 978-0-86840-413-4.
37. Pickrell, John (22 March 2018). "Early birds may have been too hefty to sit on their eggs". Nature.
doi:10.1038/d41586-018-03447-3 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fd41586-018-03447-3).
38. Agency France-Presse (April 2011). "Birds survived dino extinction with keen senses" (https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20150402124421/http://archive.cosmosmagazine.com/news/birds-survived-dino-extin
ction-with-keen-senses/). Cosmos Magazine. Archived from the original (http://archive.cosmosmagaz
ine.com/news/birds-survived-dino-extinction-with-keen-senses/) on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 11 June
2012.
39. Wang, M.; Zheng, X.; O'Connor, J. K.; Lloyd, G. T.; Wang, X.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zhou, Z. (2015).
"The oldest record of ornithuromorpha from the early cretaceous of China" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC5426517). Nature Communications. 6 (6987): 6987.
Bibcode:2015NatCo...6.6987W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015NatCo...6.6987W).
doi:10.1038/ncomms7987 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms7987). PMC 5426517 (https://www.nc
bi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5426517). PMID 25942493 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25942
493).
40. Elbein, Asher. "Why Do Birds Have Such Skinny Legs?" (https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
why-do-birds-have-such-skinny-legs/). Scientific American. Retrieved 15 February 2024.
41. Brusatte, S.L.; O'Connor, J.K.; Jarvis, J.D. (2015). "The Origin and Diversification of Birds" (https://do
i.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2015.08.003). Current Biology. 25 (19): R888 – R898.
Bibcode:2015CBio...25.R888B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015CBio...25.R888B).
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.003 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2015.08.003). hdl:10161/11144 (htt
ps://hdl.handle.net/10161%2F11144). PMID 26439352 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26439352).
42. Clarke, Julia A. (2004). "Morphology, Phylogenetic Taxonomy, and Systematics of Ichthyornis and
Apatornis (Avialae: Ornithurae)" (http://publication.plazi.org/id/BF3BCD16FFE2FF9AFFB377697C7D
B221). Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. 286: 1–179. doi:10.1206/0003-
0090(2004)286<0001:MPTASO>2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1206%2F0003-0090%282004%2928
6%3C0001%3AMPTASO%3E2.0.CO%3B2). hdl:2246/454 (https://hdl.handle.net/2246%2F454).
43. Louchart, Antoine; Viriot, Laurent (December 2011). "From snout to beak: the loss of teeth in birds".
Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 26 (12): 663–673. Bibcode:2011TEcoE..26..663L (https://ui.adsabs.h
arvard.edu/abs/2011TEcoE..26..663L). doi:10.1016/j.tree.2011.09.004 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.t
ree.2011.09.004). PMID 21978465 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21978465).
44. Clarke, J. A.; Zhou, Z.; Zhang, F. (March 2006). "Insight into the evolution of avian flight from a new
clade of Early Cretaceous ornithurines from China and the morphology of Yixianornis grabaui" (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2100246). Journal of Anatomy. 208 (3): 287–308.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7580.2006.00534.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1469-7580.2006.00534.x).
PMC 2100246 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2100246). PMID 16533313 (https://pu
bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16533313).
45. Felice, Ryan N.; Goswami, Anjali (2018). "Developmental origins of mosaic evolution in the avian
cranium" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5776993). Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 115 (3): 555–60.
Bibcode:2018PNAS..115..555F (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018PNAS..115..555F).
doi:10.1073/pnas.1716437115 (https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.1716437115). PMC 5776993 (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5776993). PMID 29279399 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/29279399).
46. Yonezawa, T.; et al. (2017). "Phylogenomics and Morphology of Extinct Paleognaths Reveal the
Origin and Evolution of the Ratites" (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2016.10.029). Current Biology.
27 (1): 68–77. Bibcode:2017CBio...27...68Y (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017CBio...27...68Y).
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.10.029 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2016.10.029). PMID 27989673 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27989673).
47. Lee, M. S. Y.; Cau, A.; Naish, D.; Dyke, G. J. (May 2014). "Morphological Clocks in Paleontology,
and a Mid-Cretaceous Origin of Crown Aves" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fsysbio%2Fsyt110).
Systematic Biology. 63 (3): 442–449. doi:10.1093/sysbio/syt110 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fsysbio%
2Fsyt110). PMID 24449041 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24449041).
48. Prum, R. O.; et al. (2015). "A comprehensive phylogeny of birds (Aves) using targeted next-
generation DNA sequencing". Nature. 526 (7574): 569–573. Bibcode:2015Natur.526..569P (https://u
i.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015Natur.526..569P). doi:10.1038/nature15697 (https://doi.org/10.1038%
2Fnature15697). PMID 26444237 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26444237).
49. Kuhl, H.; Frankl-Vilches, C.; Bakker, A.; Mayr, G.; Nikolaus, G.; Boerno, S. T.; Klages, S.;
Timmermann, B.; Gahr, M. (2020). "An unbiased molecular approach using 3'UTRs resolves the
avian family-level tree of life" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7783168). Molecular
Biology and Evolution. 38 (1): 108–127. doi:10.1093/molbev/msaa191 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fm
olbev%2Fmsaa191). hdl:21.11116/0000-0007-B72A-C (https://hdl.handle.net/21.11116%2F0000-00
07-B72A-C). PMC 7783168 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7783168).
PMID 32781465 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32781465).
50. Ericson, Per G.P.; et al. (2006). "Diversification of Neoaves: integration of molecular sequence data
and fossils" (https://web.archive.org/web/20090325235703/http://www.senckenberg.de/files/content/f
orschung/abteilung/terrzool/ornithologie/neoaves.pdf) (PDF). Biology Letters. 2 (4): 543–547.
doi:10.1098/rsbl.2006.0523 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frsbl.2006.0523). PMC 1834003 (https://ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1834003). PMID 17148284 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17
148284). Archived from the original (http://www.senckenberg.de/files/content/forschung/abteilung/terr
zool/ornithologie/neoaves.pdf) (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 4 July 2008.
51. Clarke, Julia A.; Tambussi, Claudia P.; Noriega, Jorge I.; Erickson, Gregory M.; Ketcham, Richard A.
(January 2005). "Definitive fossil evidence for the extant avian radiation in the Cretaceous". Nature.
433 (7023): 305–308. Bibcode:2005Natur.433..305C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005Natur.4
33..305C). doi:10.1038/nature03150 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature03150). hdl:11336/80763 (htt
ps://hdl.handle.net/11336%2F80763). PMID 15662422 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15662422).
52. Clarke, J. A. (2004). "Morphology, phylogenetic taxonomy, and systematics of Ichthyornis and
Apatornis (Avialae: Ornithurae)" (http://publication.plazi.org/id/BF3BCD16FFE2FF9AFFB377697C7D
B221). Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. 286: 1–179. doi:10.1206/0003-
0090(2004)286<0001:mptaso>2.0.co;2 (https://doi.org/10.1206%2F0003-0090%282004%29286%3
C0001%3Amptaso%3E2.0.co%3B2). hdl:2246/454 (https://hdl.handle.net/2246%2F454).
53. Jarvis, E. D.; et al. (2014). "Whole-genome analyses resolve early branches in the tree of life of
modern birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4405904). Science. 346 (6215):
1320–1331. Bibcode:2014Sci...346.1320J (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014Sci...346.1320J).
doi:10.1126/science.1253451 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1253451). PMC 4405904 (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4405904). PMID 25504713 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/25504713).
54. Mitchell, K. J.; Llamas, B.; Soubrier, J.; Rawlence, N. J.; Worthy, T. H.; Wood, J.; Lee, M. S. Y.;
Cooper, A. (23 May 2014). "Ancient DNA reveals elephant birds and kiwi are sister taxa and clarifies
ratite bird evolution". Science. 344 (6186): 898–900. Bibcode:2014Sci...344..898M (https://ui.adsabs.
harvard.edu/abs/2014Sci...344..898M). doi:10.1126/science.1251981 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fsci
ence.1251981). hdl:2328/35953 (https://hdl.handle.net/2328%2F35953). PMID 24855267 (https://pu
bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24855267).
55. Ritchison, Gary. "Bird biogeography" (http://people.eku.edu/ritchisong/birdbiogeography1.htm). Avian
Biology. Eastern Kentucky University. Retrieved 10 April 2008.
56. Cracraft, J. (2013). "Avian Higher-level Relationships and Classification: Nonpasseriforms". In
Dickinson, E. C.; Remsen, J. V. (eds.). The Howard and Moore Complete Checklist of the Birds of
the World. Vol. 1 (4th ed.). Aves Press, Eastbourne, U.K. pp. xxi–xli.
57. Gill, Frank; Donsker, David; Rasmussen, Pamela C. (eds.). "IOC World Bird List: Welcome" (https://
www.worldbirdnames.org/). IOC World Bird List. 14.2. Retrieved 21 November 2024.
58. "October 2022 | Clements Checklist" (https://www.birds.cornell.edu/clementschecklist/updateindex/o
ctober-2022/). www.birds.cornell.edu. Retrieved 6 January 2023.
59. Stiller, Josefin; Feng, Shaohong; Chowdhury, Al-Aabid; Rivas-González, Iker; Duchêne, David A.;
Fang, Qi; Deng, Yuan; Kozlov, Alexey; Stamatakis, Alexandros; Claramunt, Santiago; Nguyen,
Jacqueline M. T.; Ho, Simon Y. W.; Faircloth, Brant C.; Haag, Julia; Houde, Peter; Cracraft, Joel;
Balaban, Metin; Mai, Uyen; Chen, Guangji; Gao, Rongsheng; Zhou, Chengran; Xie, Yulong; Huang,
Zijian; Cao, Zhen; Yan, Zhi; Ogilvie, Huw A.; Nakhleh, Luay; Lindow, Bent; Morel, Benoit; Fjeldså,
Jon; Hosner, Peter A.; da Fonseca, Rute R.; Petersen, Bent; Tobias, Joseph A.; Székely, Tamás;
Kennedy, Jonathan David; Reeve, Andrew Hart; Liker, Andras; Stervander, Martin; Antunes,
Agostinho; Tietze, Dieter Thomas; Bertelsen, Mads F.; Lei, Fumin; Rahbek, Carsten; Graves, Gary
R.; Schierup, Mikkel H.; Warnow, Tandy; Braun, Edward L.; Gilbert, M. Thomas P.; Jarvis, Erich D.;
Mirarab, Siavash; Zhang, Guojie (23 May 2024). "Complexity of avian evolution revealed by family-
level genomes" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11111414). Nature. 629 (8013):
851–860. Bibcode:2024Natur.629..851S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024Natur.629..851S).
doi:10.1038/s41586-024-07323-1 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41586-024-07323-1). PMC 11111414
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11111414). PMID 38560995 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nl
m.nih.gov/38560995).
60. Sibley, Charles; Jon Edward Ahlquist (1990). Phylogeny and classification of birds. New Haven: Yale
University Press. ISBN 0-300-04085-7.
61. Mayr, Ernst; Short, Lester L. (1970). Species Taxa of North American Birds: A Contribution to
Comparative Systematics. Publications of the Nuttall Ornithological Club, no. 9. Cambridge, MA:
Nuttall Ornithological Club. OCLC 517185 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/517185).
62. Holmes, Bob (10 February 2022). "Learning about birds from their genomes" (https://knowablemaga
zine.org/article/living-world/2022/learning-about-birds-their-genomes). Knowable Magazine.
doi:10.1146/knowable-021022-1 (https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fknowable-021022-1). Retrieved
11 February 2022.
63. Bravo, Gustavo A.; Schmitt, C. Jonathan; Edwards, Scott V. (3 November 2021). "What Have We
Learned from the First 500 Avian Genomes?". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and
Systematics. 52 (1): 611–639. Bibcode:2021AREES..52..611B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/20
21AREES..52..611B). doi:10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-012121-085928 (https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fann
urev-ecolsys-012121-085928).
64. Feng, Shaohong; et al. (2020). "Dense sampling of bird diversity increases power of comparative
genomics" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7759463). Nature. 587 (7833): 252–257.
Bibcode:2020Natur.587..252F (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020Natur.587..252F).
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2873-9 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41586-020-2873-9). PMC 7759463 (htt
ps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7759463). PMID 33177665 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.ni
h.gov/33177665).
65. Newton, Ian (2003). The Speciation and Biogeography of Birds. Amsterdam: Academic Press.
p. 463. ISBN 0-12-517375-X.
66. Brooke, Michael (2004). Albatrosses And Petrels Across The World. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. ISBN 0-19-850125-0.
67. Weir, Jason T.; Schluter, D (2007). "The Latitudinal Gradient in Recent Speciation and Extinction
Rates of Birds and Mammals". Science. 315 (5818): 1574–1576. Bibcode:2007Sci...315.1574W (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007Sci...315.1574W). doi:10.1126/science.1135590 (https://doi.org/1
0.1126%2Fscience.1135590). PMID 17363673 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17363673).
68. Schreiber, Elizabeth Anne; Joanna Burger (2001). Biology of Marine Birds. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
ISBN 0-8493-9882-7.
69. Sato, Katsufumi; Naito, Y.; Kato, A.; Niizuma, Y.; Watanuki, Y.; Charrassin, J. B.; Bost, C. A.;
Handrich, Y.; Le Maho, Y. (1 May 2002). "Buoyancy and maximal diving depth in penguins: do they
control inhaling air volume?" (http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/content/full/205/9/1189). Journal of
Experimental Biology. 205 (9): 1189–1197. doi:10.1242/jeb.205.9.1189 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fj
eb.205.9.1189). PMID 11948196 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11948196).
70. Hill, David; Peter Robertson (1988). The Pheasant: Ecology, Management, and Conservation.
Oxford: BSP Professional. ISBN 0-632-02011-3.
71. Spreyer, Mark F.; Enrique H. Bucher (1998). "Monk Parakeet (Myiopsitta monachus)" (https://bna.bir
ds.cornell.edu/bna/species/322). The Birds of North America. Cornell Lab of Ornithology.
doi:10.2173/bna.322 (https://doi.org/10.2173%2Fbna.322). Retrieved 13 December 2015.
72. Arendt, Wayne J. (1 January 1988). "Range Expansion of the Cattle Egret, (Bubulcus ibis) in the
Greater Caribbean Basin". Colonial Waterbirds. 11 (2): 252–262. doi:10.2307/1521007 (https://doi.or
g/10.2307%2F1521007). JSTOR 1521007 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1521007).
73. Bierregaard, R. O. (1994). "Yellow-headed Caracara". In Josep del Hoyo; Andrew Elliott; Jordi
Sargatal (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Volume 2; New World Vultures to Guineafowl.
Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-15-6.
74. Juniper, Tony; Mike Parr (1998). Parrots: A Guide to the Parrots of the World. London: Christopher
Helm. ISBN 0-7136-6933-0.
75. Weijden, Wouter van der; Terwan, Paul; Guldemond, Adriaan, eds. (2010). Farmland Birds across
the World. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. p. 4. ISBN 978-84-96553-63-7.
76. Ehrlich, Paul R.; David S. Dobkin; Darryl Wheye (1988). "Adaptations for Flight" (http://www.stanford.
edu/group/stanfordbirds/text/essays/Adaptations.html). Birds of Stanford. Stanford University.
Retrieved 13 December 2007. Based on The Birder's Handbook (Paul Ehrlich, David Dobkin, and
Darryl Wheye. 1988. Simon and Schuster, New York.)
77. Gill, Frank (1995). Ornithology. New York: WH Freeman and Co. ISBN 0-7167-2415-4.
78. Noll, Paul. "The Avian Skeleton" (http://www.paulnoll.com/Oregon/Birds/Avian-Skeleton.html).
paulnoll.com. Retrieved 13 December 2007.
79. "Skeleton of a typical bird" (http://fsc.fernbank.edu/Birding/skeleton.htm). Fernbank Science Center's
Ornithology Web. Retrieved 13 December 2007.
80. "The Surprising Closest Relative of the Huge Elephant Birds" (https://web.archive.org/web/20181214
065448/https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/phenomena/2014/05/22/the-surprising-closest-r
elative-of-the-huge-elephant-birds/). Science & Innovation. 22 May 2014. Archived from the original
(https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/phenomena/2014/05/22/the-surprising-closest-relative-
of-the-huge-elephant-birds/) on 14 December 2018. Retrieved 6 March 2019.
81. Ehrlich, Paul R.; David S. Dobkin; Darryl Wheye (1988). "Drinking" (http://www.stanford.edu/group/st
anfordbirds/text/essays/Drinking.html). Birds of Stanford. Stanford University. Retrieved
13 December 2007.
82. Tsahar, Ella; Martínez Del Rio, C; Izhaki, I; Arad, Z (2005). "Can birds be ammonotelic? Nitrogen
balance and excretion in two frugivores" (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.01495). Journal of
Experimental Biology. 208 (6): 1025–1034. Bibcode:2005JExpB.208.1025T (https://ui.adsabs.harvar
d.edu/abs/2005JExpB.208.1025T). doi:10.1242/jeb.01495 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.01495).
PMID 15767304 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15767304).
83. Skadhauge, E; Erlwanger, KH; Ruziwa, SD; Dantzer, V; Elbrønd, VS; Chamunorwa, JP (2003).
"Does the ostrich (Struthio camelus) coprodeum have the electrophysiological properties and
microstructure of other birds?". Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A. 134 (4): 749–755.
doi:10.1016/S1095-6433(03)00006-0 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS1095-6433%2803%2900006-0).
PMID 12814783 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12814783).
84. Preest, Marion R.; Beuchat, Carol A. (April 1997). "Ammonia excretion by hummingbirds". Nature.
386 (6625): 561–562. Bibcode:1997Natur.386..561P (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1997Natur.3
86..561P). doi:10.1038/386561a0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F386561a0).
85. Mora, J.; Martuscelli, J; Ortiz Pineda, J; Soberon, G (1965). "The regulation of urea-biosynthesis
enzymes in vertebrates" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1206904). Biochemical
Journal. 96 (1): 28–35. doi:10.1042/bj0960028 (https://doi.org/10.1042%2Fbj0960028).
PMC 1206904 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1206904). PMID 14343146 (https://pu
bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14343146).
86. Packard, Gary C. (1966). "The Influence of Ambient Temperature and Aridity on Modes of
Reproduction and Excretion of Amniote Vertebrates". The American Naturalist. 100 (916): 667–682.
Bibcode:1966ANat..100..667P (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1966ANat..100..667P).
doi:10.1086/282459 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F282459). JSTOR 2459303 (https://www.jstor.org/sta
ble/2459303).
87. Balgooyen, Thomas G. (1 October 1971). "Pellet Regurgitation by Captive Sparrow Hawks (Falco
sparverius)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140224142542/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/jou
rnals/condor/v073n03/p0382-p0385.pdf) (PDF). Condor. 73 (3): 382–385. doi:10.2307/1365774 (http
s://doi.org/10.2307%2F1365774). JSTOR 1365774 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1365774). Archived
from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v073n03/p0382-p0385.pdf)
(PDF) on 24 February 2014 – via Searchable Ornithological Research Archive.
88. Jones, Benji (7 August 2018). "What Are Fecal Sacs? Bird Diapers, Basically" (https://www.audubon.
org/news/what-are-fecal-sacs-bird-diapers-basically). Audubon. Retrieved 17 January 2021.
89. Encyclopedia of Animal Behavior (https://books.google.com/books?id=O5lnDwAAQBAJ&pg=RA3-PA
513). Academic Press. 21 January 2019. ISBN 978-0-12-813252-4.
90. Yong, Ed (6 June 2013). "How Chickens Lost Their Penises (And Ducks Kept Theirs)" (https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20130609052803/http://phenomena.nationalgeographic.com/2013/06/06/how-chicken
s-lost-their-penises-ducks-kept-theirs/). Phenomena: Not Exactly Rocket Science. National
Geographic. Archived from the original (http://phenomena.nationalgeographic.com/2013/06/06/how-c
hickens-lost-their-penises-ducks-kept-theirs/) on 9 June 2013. Retrieved 3 October 2013.
91. "Ornithology, 3rd Edition – Waterfowl: Order Anseriformes" (https://web.archive.org/web/2015062203
0534/http://bcs.whfreeman.com/gill/bcs-pages/body-right_10.asp?s=10000&n=00010&i=99010.06&v
=chapter&o=%7C13000%7C00010%7C&ns=undefined). Archived from the original (http://bcs.whfre
eman.com/gill/bcs-pages/body-right_10.asp?s=10000&n=00010&i=99010.06&v=chapter&o=%7C13
000%7C00010%7C&ns=undefined) on 22 June 2015. Retrieved 3 October 2013.
92. McCracken, Kevin G. (2000). "The 20-cm Spiny Penis of the Argentine Lake Duck (Oxyura vittata)".
The Auk. 117 (3): 820. doi:10.1642/0004-8038(2000)117[0820:TCSPOT]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.
1642%2F0004-8038%282000%29117%5B0820%3ATCSPOT%5D2.0.CO%3B2).
93. Marcus, Adam (2011). "Ostrich penis clears up evolutionary mystery" (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnat
ure.2011.9600). Nature. doi:10.1038/nature.2011.9600 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature.2011.960
0).
94. Sasanami, Tomohiro; Matsuzaki, Mei; Mizushima, Shusei; Hiyama, Gen (2013). "Sperm Storage in
the Female Reproductive Tract in Birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3944358).
Journal of Reproduction and Development. 59 (4): 334–338. doi:10.1262/jrd.2013-038 (https://doi.or
g/10.1262%2Fjrd.2013-038). PMC 3944358 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC394435
8). PMID 23965601 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23965601).
95. Birkhead, T. R.; Møller, P. (1993). "Sexual selection and the temporal separation of reproductive
events: sperm storage data from reptiles, birds and mammals". Biological Journal of the Linnean
Society. 50 (4): 295–311. doi:10.1111/j.1095-8312.1993.tb00933.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.109
5-8312.1993.tb00933.x).
96. Guioli, Silvana; Nandi, Sunil; Zhao, Debiao; Burgess-Shannon, Jessica; Lovell-Badge, Robin;
Clinton, Michael (2014). "Gonadal Asymmetry and Sex Determination in Birds" (https://doi.org/10.11
59%2F000358406). Sexual Development. 8 (5): 227–242. doi:10.1159/000358406 (https://doi.org/1
0.1159%2F000358406). PMID 24577119 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24577119).
97. Dawson, Alistair (April 2015). "Annual gonadal cycles in birds: Modeling the effects of photoperiod on
seasonal changes in GnRH-1 secretion" (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.yfrne.2014.08.004). Frontiers
in Neuroendocrinology. 37: 52–64. doi:10.1016/j.yfrne.2014.08.004 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.yfrn
e.2014.08.004). PMID 25194876 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25194876).
98. Farner, Donald S.; Follett, Brian K.; King, James R.; Morton, Msrtin L. (February 1966). "A
Quantitative Examination of Ovarian Growth in the White-Crowned Sparrow" (https://www.biodiversit
ylibrary.org/part/9389). The Biological Bulletin. 130 (1): 67–75. Bibcode:1966BiolB.130...67F (https://
ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1966BiolB.130...67F). doi:10.2307/1539953 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1
539953). JSTOR 1539953 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1539953). PMID 5948479 (https://pubmed.nc
bi.nlm.nih.gov/5948479).
99. Ramachandran, R; McDaniel, C D (June 2018). "Parthenogenesis in birds: a review" (https://doi.org/
10.1530%2FREP-17-0728). Reproduction. 155 (6): R245 – R257. doi:10.1530/REP-17-0728 (https://
doi.org/10.1530%2FREP-17-0728). PMID 29559496 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29559496).
100. Matsuda, Masaru (2018). "Genetic Control of Sex Determination and Differentiation in Fish".
Reproductive and Developmental Strategies. Diversity and Commonality in Animals. pp. 289–306.
doi:10.1007/978-4-431-56609-0_14 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-4-431-56609-0_14). ISBN 978-
4-431-56607-6. p. 290: "Mammals and birds are solely gonochoristic. In mammals, the sex is
determined by the genetic male heterogametic system (XX–XY). In birds, the female heterogametic
ssytem (ZZ-ZW) is used."
101. Tuttle, Elaina M.; Bergland, Alan O.; Korody, Marisa L.; Brewer, Michael S.; Newhouse, Daniel J.;
Minx, Patrick; Stager, Maria; Betuel, Adam; Cheviron, Zachary A.; Warren, Wesley C.; Gonser, Rusty
A.; Balakrishnan, Christopher N. (2016). "Divergence and Functional Degradation of a Sex
Chromosome-like Supergene" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4747794). Current
Biology. 26 (3): 344–350. Bibcode:2016CBio...26..344T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016CBi
o...26..344T). doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.11.069 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2015.11.069).
PMC 4747794 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4747794). PMID 26804558 (https://pu
bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26804558).
102. Göth, Anne (2007). "Incubation temperatures and sex ratios in Australian brush-turkey (Alectura
lathami) mounds". Austral Ecology. 32 (4): 278–285. Bibcode:2007AusEc..32..378G (https://ui.adsab
s.harvard.edu/abs/2007AusEc..32..378G). doi:10.1111/j.1442-9993.2007.01709.x (https://doi.org/10.
1111%2Fj.1442-9993.2007.01709.x).
103. Göth, A; Booth, DT (March 2005). "Temperature-dependent sex ratio in a bird" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1629050). Biology Letters. 1 (1): 31–33. Bibcode:2005BiLet...1...31G (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005BiLet...1...31G). doi:10.1098/rsbl.2004.0247 (https://doi.org/10.10
98%2Frsbl.2004.0247). PMC 1629050 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1629050).
PMID 17148121 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17148121).
104. Maina, John N. (10 January 2007). "Development, structure, and function of a novel respiratory
organ, the lung-air sac system of birds: to go where no other vertebrate has gone". Biological
Reviews. 81 (4): 545–579. doi:10.1111/j.1469-185X.2006.tb00218.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.14
69-185X.2006.tb00218.x). PMID 17038201 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17038201).
105. Suthers, Roderick A.; Sue Anne Zollinger (June 2004). "Producing song: the vocal apparatus". Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1016 (1): 109–129. Bibcode:2004NYASA1016..109S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/a
bs/2004NYASA1016..109S). doi:10.1196/annals.1298.041 (https://doi.org/10.1196%2Fannals.1298.
041). PMID 15313772 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15313772).
106. Fitch, W.T. (1999). "Acoustic exaggeration of size in birds via tracheal elongation: comparative and
theoretical analyses". Journal of Zoology. 248 S095283699900504X: 31–48.
doi:10.1017/S095283699900504X (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS095283699900504X).
107. Scott, Robert B. (March 1966). "Comparative hematology: The phylogeny of the erythrocyte". Annals
of Hematology. 12 (6): 340–351. doi:10.1007/BF01632827 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF0163282
7). PMID 5325853 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5325853).
108. Whittow, G. (2000). Whittow, G. Causey (ed.). Sturkie's Avian Physiology. San Diego: Academic
Press.
109. Molnar, Charles; Gair, Jane (14 May 2015). "21.3. Mammalian Heart and Blood Vessels" (https://ope
ntextbc.ca/biology/chapter/21-3-mammalian-heart-and-blood-vessels/).
110. Hoagstrom, C.W. (2002). "Vertebrate Circulation". Magill's Encyclopedia of Science: Animal Life. 1.
Pasadena, California: Salem Press: 217–219.
111. Hill, Richard W. (2012). Hill, Richard W.; Wyse, Gordon A.; Anderson, Margaret (eds.). Animal
Physiology (Third ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. pp. 647–678.
112. Barbara, Taylor (2004). pockets: birds. UK: Dorling Kindersley. p. 16. ISBN 0-7513-5176-8.
113. Sales, James (2005). "The endangered kiwi: a review" (https://web.archive.org/web/2007092600533
7/http://www.ivb.cz/folia/54/1-2/01-20.pdf) (PDF). Folia Zoologica. 54 (1–2): 1–20.
ProQuest 206353860 (https://www.proquest.com/docview/206353860). Archived from the original (ht
tp://www.ivb.cz/folia/54/1-2/01-20.pdf) (PDF) on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 15 September 2007.
114. Ehrlich, Paul R.; David S. Dobkin; Darryl Wheye (1988). "The Avian Sense of Smell" (http://www.stan
ford.edu/group/stanfordbirds/text/essays/Avian_Sense.html). Birds of Stanford. Stanford University.
Retrieved 13 December 2007.
115. Lequette, Benoit; Verheyden, Christophe; Jouventin, Pierre (August 1989). "Olfaction in Subantarctic
seabirds: Its phylogenetic and ecological significance" (https://web.archive.org/web/2013122504465
0/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v091n03/p0732-p0735.pdf) (PDF). The
Condor. 91 (3): 732–735. doi:10.2307/1368131 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1368131).
JSTOR 1368131 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1368131). Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.e
du/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v091n03/p0732-p0735.pdf) (PDF) on 25 December 2013.
116. Wilkie, Susan E.; Vissers, P. M.; Das, D.; Degrip, W. J.; Bowmaker, J. K.; Hunt, D. M. (February
1998). "The molecular basis for UV vision in birds: spectral characteristics, cDNA sequence and
retinal localization of the UV-sensitive visual pigment of the budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus)" (ht
tps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1219171). Biochemical Journal. 330 (Pt 1): 541–547.
doi:10.1042/bj3300541 (https://doi.org/10.1042%2Fbj3300541). PMC 1219171 (https://www.ncbi.nl
m.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1219171). PMID 9461554 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9461554).
117. Olsson, Peter; Lind, Olle; Kelber, Almut; Simmons, Leigh (2018). "Chromatic and achromatic vision:
parameter choice and limitations for reliable model predictions" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbehec
o%2Farx133). Behavioral Ecology. 29 (2): 273–282. doi:10.1093/beheco/arx133 (https://doi.org/10.1
093%2Fbeheco%2Farx133).
118. Andersson, S.; J. Ornborg; M. Andersson (1998). "Ultraviolet sexual dimorphism and assortative
mating in blue tits" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1688915). Proceedings of the
Royal Society B. 265 (1395): 445–450. doi:10.1098/rspb.1998.0315 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frsp
b.1998.0315). PMC 1688915 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1688915).
119. Viitala, Jussi; Korplmäki, Erkki; Palokangas, Pälvl; Koivula, Minna (1995). "Attraction of kestrels to
vole scent marks visible in ultraviolet light". Nature. 373 (6513): 425–427.
Bibcode:1995Natur.373..425V (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995Natur.373..425V).
doi:10.1038/373425a0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F373425a0).
120. Pettingill, Olin Sewall Jr. (1985). Ornithology in Laboratory and Field. Fifth Edition (https://books.goo
gle.com/books?id=livLBAAAQBAJ&pg=PA11). Orlando, FL: Academic Press. p. 11. ISBN 0-12-
552455-2.
121. Williams, David L.; Flach, E (March 2003). "Symblepharon with aberrant protrusion of the nictitating
membrane in the snowy owl (Nyctea scandiaca)". Veterinary Ophthalmology. 6 (1): 11–13.
doi:10.1046/j.1463-5224.2003.00250.x (https://doi.org/10.1046%2Fj.1463-5224.2003.00250.x).
PMID 12641836 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12641836).
122. Land, M. F. (2014). "Eye movements of vertebrates and their relation to eye form and function".
Journal of Comparative Physiology A. 201 (2): 195–214. doi:10.1007/s00359-014-0964-5 (https://doi.
org/10.1007%2Fs00359-014-0964-5). PMID 25398576 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25398576).
123. Martin, Graham R.; Katzir, G (1999). "Visual fields in Short-toed Eagles, Circaetus gallicus
(Accipitridae), and the function of binocularity in birds". Brain, Behavior and Evolution. 53 (2): 55–66.
doi:10.1159/000006582 (https://doi.org/10.1159%2F000006582). PMID 9933782 (https://pubmed.nc
bi.nlm.nih.gov/9933782).
124. Saito, Nozomu (1978). "Physiology and anatomy of avian ear" (https://doi.org/10.1121%2F1.200419
3). The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 64 (S1): S3. Bibcode:1978ASAJ...64....3S (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1978ASAJ...64....3S). doi:10.1121/1.2004193 (https://doi.org/10.112
1%2F1.2004193).
125. Zeyl, Jeffrey N.; den Ouden, Olivier; Köppl, Christine; Assink, Jelle; Christensen-Dalsgaard, Jakob;
Patrick, Samantha C.; Clusella-Trullas, Susana (2020). "Infrasonic hearing in birds: a review of
audiometry and hypothesized structure–function relationships" (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fbrv.1259
6). Biological Reviews. 95 (4): 1036–1054. doi:10.1111/brv.12596 (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fbrv.12
596). ISSN 1464-7931 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1464-7931). PMID 32237036 (https://pubme
d.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32237036).
126. Brinkløv, Signe; Fenton, M. Brock; Ratcliffe, John M. (2013). "Echolocation in Oilbirds and swiftlets"
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3664765). Frontiers in Physiology. 4: 123.
doi:10.3389/fphys.2013.00123 (https://doi.org/10.3389%2Ffphys.2013.00123). ISSN 1664-042X (htt
ps://search.worldcat.org/issn/1664-042X). PMC 3664765 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC3664765). PMID 23755019 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23755019).
127. Warham, John (1 May 1977). "The incidence, function and ecological significance of petrel stomach
oils" (http://www.newzealandecology.org/nzje/free_issues/ProNZES24_84.pdf) (PDF). Proceedings
of the New Zealand Ecological Society. 24 (3): 84–93. Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/202
21009/http://www.newzealandecology.org/nzje/free_issues/ProNZES24_84.pdf) (PDF) from the
original on 9 October 2022.
128. Dumbacher, J.P.; Beehler, BM; Spande, TF; Garraffo, HM; Daly, JW (October 1992).
"Homobatrachotoxin in the genus Pitohui: chemical defense in birds?". Science. 258 (5083): 799–
801. Bibcode:1992Sci...258..799D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1992Sci...258..799D).
doi:10.1126/science.1439786 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1439786). PMID 1439786 (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1439786).
129. Longrich, N.R.; Olson, S.L. (5 January 2011). "The bizarre wing of the Jamaican flightless ibis
Xenicibis xympithecus: a unique vertebrate adaptation" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/P
MC3119002). Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 278 (1716): 2333–2337.
doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.2117 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2010.2117). PMC 3119002 (https://ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3119002). PMID 21208965 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21
208965).
130. Belthoff, James R.; Dufty; Gauthreaux (1 August 1994). "Plumage Variation, Plasma Steroids and
Social Dominance in Male House Finches" (https://web.archive.org/web/20170313042707/https://wo
rks.bepress.com/james_belthoff/29/). The Condor. 96 (3): 614–625. Bibcode:1994Condo..96..614B
(https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1994Condo..96..614B). doi:10.2307/1369464 (https://doi.org/10.2
307%2F1369464). JSTOR 1369464 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1369464). Archived from the
original (http://works.bepress.com/james_belthoff/29) on 13 March 2017. Retrieved 27 February
2017.
131. Guthrie, R. Dale. "How We Use and Show Our Social Organs" (https://web.archive.org/web/2007062
1225459/http://employees.csbsju.edu/lmealey/hotspots/chapter03.htm). Body Hot Spots: The
Anatomy of Human Social Organs and Behavior. Archived from the original (http://employees.csbsju.
edu/lmealey/hotspots/chapter03.htm) on 21 June 2007. Retrieved 19 October 2007.
132. Humphrey, Philip S.; Parkes, K. C. (1 June 1959). "An approach to the study of molts and plumages"
(http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v076n01/p0001-p0031.pdf) (PDF). The Auk. 76
(1): 1–31. Bibcode:1959Auk....76....1H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1959Auk....76....1H).
doi:10.2307/4081839 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4081839). JSTOR 4081839 (https://www.jstor.org/s
table/4081839). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/defaul
t/files/journals/auk/v076n01/p0001-p0031.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
133. Pettingill Jr. OS (1970). Ornithology in Laboratory and Field (https://archive.org/details/ornithologyinl
ab0000pett_i2b3). Burgess Publishing Co. ISBN 0-12-552455-2.
134. de Beer, S. J.; Lockwood, G. M.; Raijmakers, J. H. F. S.; Raijmakers, J. M. H.; Scott, W. A.;
Oschadleus, H. D.; Underhill, L. G. (2001). SAFRING Bird Ringing Manual (https://web.archive.org/w
eb/20171019032817/http://safring.adu.org.za/downloads/ringers-manual.pdf) (PDF). Archived from
the original (http://safring.adu.org.za/downloads/ringers-manual.pdf) (PDF) on 19 October 2017.
135. Gargallo, Gabriel (1 June 1994). "Flight Feather Moult in the Red-Necked Nightjar Caprimulgus
ruficollis". Journal of Avian Biology. 25 (2): 119–124. doi:10.2307/3677029 (https://doi.org/10.2307%
2F3677029). JSTOR 3677029 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3677029).
136. Mayr, Ernst (1954). "The tail molt of small owls" (https://web.archive.org/web/20141004053953/http://
sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v071n02/p0172-p0178.pdf) (PDF). The Auk. 71 (2):
172–178. doi:10.2307/4081571 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4081571). JSTOR 4081571 (https://ww
w.jstor.org/stable/4081571). Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journal
s/auk/v071n02/p0172-p0178.pdf) (PDF) on 4 October 2014.
137. Payne, Robert B. "Birds of the World, Biology 532" (https://web.archive.org/web/20120226062512/htt
p://www.ummz.umich.edu/birds/resources/families_otw.html). Bird Division, University of Michigan
Museum of Zoology. Archived from the original (http://www.ummz.umich.edu/birds/resources/families
_otw.html) on 26 February 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2007.
138. Turner, J. Scott (1997). "On the thermal capacity of a bird's egg warmed by a brood patch".
Physiological Zoology. 70 (4): 470–480. doi:10.1086/515854 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F515854).
PMID 9237308 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9237308).
139. Walther, Bruno A. (2005). "Elaborate ornaments are costly to maintain: evidence for high
maintenance handicaps" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Farh135). Behavioral Ecology. 16
(1): 89–95. doi:10.1093/beheco/arh135 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Farh135).
140. Shawkey, Matthew D.; Pillai, Shreekumar R.; Hill, Geoffrey E. (2003). "Chemical warfare? Effects of
uropygial oil on feather-degrading bacteria". Journal of Avian Biology. 34 (4): 345–349.
doi:10.1111/j.0908-8857.2003.03193.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0908-8857.2003.03193.x).
141. Ehrlich, Paul R. (1986). "The Adaptive Significance of Anting" (https://web.archive.org/web/20160305
202116/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v103n04/p0835-p0835.pdf) (PDF). The
Auk. 103 (4): 835. Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v103
n04/p0835-p0835.pdf) (PDF) on 5 March 2016.
142. Lucas, Alfred M. (1972). Avian Anatomy – integument. East Lansing, Michigan: USDA Avian
Anatomy Project, Michigan State University. pp. 67, 344, 394–601.
143. Roots, Clive (2006). Flightless Birds. Westport: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-33545-7.
144. McNab, Brian K. (October 1994). "Energy Conservation and the Evolution of Flightlessness in Birds".
The American Naturalist. 144 (4): 628–642. Bibcode:1994ANat..144..628M (https://ui.adsabs.harvar
d.edu/abs/1994ANat..144..628M). doi:10.1086/285697 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F285697).
JSTOR 2462941 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2462941).
145. Palombo, Maria Rita; Moncunill-Solé, Blanca (2025). "Dwarfing and gigantism in Quaternary
vertebrates". Encyclopedia of Quaternary Science. pp. 584–608. doi:10.1016/B978-0-323-99931-
1.00012-X (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FB978-0-323-99931-1.00012-X). ISBN 978-0-443-29997-1.
146. Gillespie, Rosemary G. (2007). "Oceanic Islands: Models of Diversity". Encyclopedia of Biodiversity.
pp. 1–13. doi:10.1016/B978-012226865-6/00517-1 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FB978-012226865-6%
2F00517-1). ISBN 978-0-12-226865-6.
147. Kovacs, Christopher E.; Meyers, Ron A. (May 2000). "Anatomy and histochemistry of flight muscles
in a wing-propelled diving bird, the Atlantic Puffin, Fratercula arctica". Journal of Morphology. 244 (2):
109–125. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4687(200005)244:2<109::AID-JMOR2>3.0.CO;2-0 (https://doi.org/
10.1002%2F%28SICI%291097-4687%28200005%29244%3A2%3C109%3A%3AAID-JMOR2%3E3.
0.CO%3B2-0). PMID 10761049 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10761049).
148. Robert, Michel; McNeil, Raymond; Leduc, Alain (January 1989). "Conditions and significance of night
feeding in shorebirds and other water birds in a tropical lagoon" (https://web.archive.org/web/201410
04070208/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v106n01/p0094-p0101.pdf) (PDF). The
Auk. 106 (1): 94–101. Bibcode:1989Auk...106...94R (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1989Auk...10
6...94R). doi:10.2307/4087761 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4087761). JSTOR 4087761 (https://www.j
stor.org/stable/4087761). Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/a
uk/v106n01/p0094-p0101.pdf) (PDF) on 4 October 2014.
149. Gionfriddo, James P.; Best (1 February 1995). "Grit Use by House Sparrows: Effects of Diet and Grit
Size" (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v097n01/p0057-p0067.pdf) (PDF).
Condor. 97 (1): 57–67. Bibcode:1995Condo..97...57G (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995Cond
o..97...57G). doi:10.2307/1368983 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1368983). JSTOR 1368983 (https://w
ww.jstor.org/stable/1368983). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://sora.unm.e
du/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v097n01/p0057-p0067.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9
October 2022.
150. Hagey, Lee R.; Vidal, Nicolas; Hofmann, Alan F.; Krasowski, Matthew D. (2010). "Complex Evolution
of Bile Salts in Birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2990222). The Auk. 127 (4):
820–831. doi:10.1525/auk.2010.09155 (https://doi.org/10.1525%2Fauk.2010.09155). PMC 2990222
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2990222). PMID 21113274 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/21113274).
151. Attenborough, David (1998). The Life of Birds. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-
01633-X.
152. Battley, Phil F.; Piersma, T; Dietz, MW; Tang, S; Dekinga, A; Hulsman, K (January 2000). "Empirical
evidence for differential organ reductions during trans-oceanic bird flight" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.g
ov/pmc/articles/PMC1690512). Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 267 (1439): 191–195.
Bibcode:2000PBioS.267..191B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2000PBioS.267..191B).
doi:10.1098/rspb.2000.0986 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2000.0986). PMC 1690512 (https://ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1690512). PMID 10687826 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10
687826). (Erratum in Proceedings of the Royal Society B 267(1461):2567.)
153. Reid, N. (2006). "Birds on New England wool properties – A woolgrower guide" (https://web.archive.o
rg/web/20110315005353/http://lwa.gov.au/files/products/land-water-and-wool/pf061365/pf061365.pd
f) (PDF). Land, Water & Wool Northern Tablelands Property Fact Sheet. Australian Government –
Land and Water Australia. Archived from the original (http://lwa.gov.au/files/products/land-water-and-
wool/pf061365/pf061365.pdf) (PDF) on 15 March 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2010.
154. Nyffeler, M.; Şekercioğlu, Ç. H.; Whelan, C. J. (August 2018). "Insectivorous birds consume an
estimated 400–500 million tons of prey annually" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC606
1143). The Science of Nature. 105 (7–8): 47. Bibcode:2018SciNa.105...47N (https://ui.adsabs.harvar
d.edu/abs/2018SciNa.105...47N). doi:10.1007/s00114-018-1571-z (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs0011
4-018-1571-z). PMC 6061143 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6061143).
PMID 29987431 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29987431).
155. Paton, D. C.; Collins, B.G. (1 April 1989). "Bills and tongues of nectar-feeding birds: A review of
morphology, function, and performance, with intercontinental comparisons". Australian Journal of
Ecology. 14 (4): 473–506. Bibcode:1989AusEc..14..473P (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1989Au
sEc..14..473P). doi:10.1111/j.1442-9993.1989.tb01457.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1442-9993.19
89.tb01457.x).
156. Baker, Myron Charles; Baker, Ann Eileen Miller (1 April 1973). "Niche Relationships Among Six
Species of Shorebirds on Their Wintering and Breeding Ranges". Ecological Monographs. 43 (2):
193–212. Bibcode:1973EcoM...43..193B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1973EcoM...43..193B).
doi:10.2307/1942194 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1942194). JSTOR 1942194 (https://www.jstor.org/s
table/1942194).
157. Cherel, Yves; Bocher, P; De Broyer, C; Hobson, KA (2002). "Food and feeding ecology of the
sympatric thin-billed Pachyptila belcheri and Antarctic P. desolata prions at Iles Kerguelen, Southern
Indian Ocean" (https://doi.org/10.3354%2Fmeps228263). Marine Ecology Progress Series. 228:
263–281. Bibcode:2002MEPS..228..263C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002MEPS..228..263
C). doi:10.3354/meps228263 (https://doi.org/10.3354%2Fmeps228263).
158. Jenkin, Penelope M. (1957). "The Filter-Feeding and Food of Flamingoes (Phoenicopteri)".
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 240 (674): 401–493.
Bibcode:1957RSPTB.240..401J (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1957RSPTB.240..401J).
doi:10.1098/rstb.1957.0004 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frstb.1957.0004). JSTOR 92549 (https://ww
w.jstor.org/stable/92549).
159. Hughes, Baz; Green, Andy J. (2005). "Feeding Ecology" (https://books.google.com/books?id=MfrdBc
Kd79wC&pg=PA42). In Kear, Janet (ed.). Ducks, Geese and Swans. Oxford University Press.
pp. 42–44. ISBN 978-0-19-861008-3.
160. Li, Zhiheng; Clarke, Julia A. (2016). "The Craniolingual Morphology of Waterfowl (Aves,
Anseriformes) and Its Relationship with Feeding Mode Revealed Through Contrast-Enhanced X-Ray
Computed Tomography and 2D Morphometrics". Evolutionary Biology. 43 (1): 12–25.
Bibcode:2016EvBio..43...12L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016EvBio..43...12L).
doi:10.1007/s11692-015-9345-4 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs11692-015-9345-4).
161. Takahashi, Akinori; Kuroki, Maki; Niizuma, Yasuaki; Watanuki, Yutaka (December 1999). "Parental
Food Provisioning Is Unrelated to Manipulated Offspring Food Demand in a Nocturnal Single-
Provisioning Alcid, the Rhinoceros Auklet". Journal of Avian Biology. 30 (4): 486.
Bibcode:1999JAvBi..30..486T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999JAvBi..30..486T).
doi:10.2307/3677021 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3677021). JSTOR 3677021 (https://www.jstor.org/s
table/3677021).
162. Bélisle, Marc; Giroux (1 August 1995). "Predation and kleptoparasitism by migrating Parasitic
Jaegers" (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v097n03/p0771-p0781.pdf) (PDF).
The Condor. 97 (3): 771–781. doi:10.2307/1369185 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1369185).
JSTOR 1369185 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1369185). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/2
0221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v097n03/p0771-p0781.pdf) (PDF)
from the original on 9 October 2022.
163. Vickery, J. A. (May 1994). "The Kleptoparasitic Interactions between Great Frigatebirds and Masked
Boobies on Henderson Island, South Pacific" (https://archive.org/details/sim_condor_1994-05_96_2/
page/331). The Condor. 96 (2): 331–340. doi:10.2307/1369318 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F136931
8). JSTOR 1369318 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1369318).
164. Hiraldo, F. C.; Blanco, J. C.; Bustamante, J. (1991). "Unspecialized exploitation of small carcasses
by birds". Bird Studies. 38 (3): 200–207. Bibcode:1991BirdS..38..200H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.ed
u/abs/1991BirdS..38..200H). doi:10.1080/00063659109477089 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F0006365
9109477089). hdl:10261/47141 (https://hdl.handle.net/10261%2F47141).
165. Engel, Sophia Barbara (2005). Racing the wind: Water economy and energy expenditure in avian
endurance flight (https://web.archive.org/web/20200405201429/http://irs.ub.rug.nl/ppn/287916626).
University of Groningen. ISBN 90-367-2378-7. Archived from the original (http://irs.ub.rug.nl/ppn/287
916626) on 5 April 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2008.
166. Tieleman, B. Irene; Williams, Joseph B. (January 1999). "The Role of Hyperthermia in the Water
Economy of Desert Birds" (https://pure.rug.nl/ws/files/62402849/The_Role_of_Hyperthermia_in_the_
Water_Economy_of_Desert_Birds.pdf) (PDF). Physiological and Biochemical Zoology. 72 (1): 87–
100. Bibcode:1999PhyBZ..72...87T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999PhyBZ..72...87T).
doi:10.1086/316640 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F316640). hdl:11370/6edc6940-c2e8-4c96-832e-
0b6982dd59c1 (https://hdl.handle.net/11370%2F6edc6940-c2e8-4c96-832e-0b6982dd59c1).
PMID 9882607 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9882607).
167. Schmidt-Nielsen, Knut (1 May 1960). "The Salt-Secreting Gland of Marine Birds" (https://doi.org/10.1
161%2F01.CIR.21.5.955). Circulation. 21 (5): 955–967. Bibcode:1960Circu..21..955S (https://ui.ads
abs.harvard.edu/abs/1960Circu..21..955S). doi:10.1161/01.CIR.21.5.955 (https://doi.org/10.1161%2
F01.CIR.21.5.955). PMID 14443123 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14443123).
168. Hallager, Sara L. (1994). "Drinking methods in two species of bustards". Wilson Bull. 106 (4): 763–
764. hdl:10088/4338 (https://hdl.handle.net/10088%2F4338).
169. MacLean, Gordon L. (1 June 1983). "Water Transport by Sandgrouse" (https://archive.org/details/sim
_bioscience_1983-06_33_6/page/365). BioScience. 33 (6): 365–369. doi:10.2307/1309104 (https://d
oi.org/10.2307%2F1309104). JSTOR 1309104 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1309104).
170. Eraud C; Dorie A; Jacquet A; Faivre B (2008). "The crop milk: a potential new route for carotenoid-
mediated parental effects" (https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00294461/file/Eraud2008.pdf) (PDF).
Journal of Avian Biology. 39 (2): 247–251. doi:10.1111/j.0908-8857.2008.04053.x (https://doi.org/10.
1111%2Fj.0908-8857.2008.04053.x). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/https://ha
l.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00294461/file/Eraud2008.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
171. Mario, Principato; Federica, Lisi; Iolanda, Moretta; Nada, Samra; Francesco, Puccetti (2005). "The
alterations of plumage of parasitic origin" (https://doi.org/10.4081%2Fijas.2005.296). Italian Journal
of Animal Science. 4 (3): 296–299. doi:10.4081/ijas.2005.296 (https://doi.org/10.4081%2Fijas.2005.2
96).
172. Revis, Hannah C.; Waller, Deborah A. (2004). "Bactericidal and fungicidal activity of ant chemicals
on feather parasites: an evaluation of anting behavior as a method of self-medication in songbirds"
(https://doi.org/10.1642%2F0004-8038%282004%29121%5B1262%3ABAFAOA%5D2.0.CO%3B2).
The Auk. 121 (4): 1262–1268. doi:10.1642/0004-8038(2004)121[1262:BAFAOA]2.0.CO;2 (https://do
i.org/10.1642%2F0004-8038%282004%29121%5B1262%3ABAFAOA%5D2.0.CO%3B2).
173. Clayton, Dale H.; Koop, Jennifer A.H.; Harbison, Christopher W.; Moyer, Brett R.; Bush, Sarah E.
(2010). "How Birds Combat Ectoparasites" (https://doi.org/10.2174%2F1874453201003010041).
The Open Ornithology Journal. 3: 41–71. doi:10.2174/1874453201003010041 (https://doi.org/10.217
4%2F1874453201003010041).
174. Battley, Phil F.; Piersma, T.; Dietz, M. W.; Tang, S; Dekinga, A.; Hulsman, K. (January 2000).
"Empirical evidence for differential organ reductions during trans-oceanic bird flight" (https://www.ncb
i.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1690512). Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 267 (1439): 191–195.
Bibcode:2000PBioS.267..191B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2000PBioS.267..191B).
doi:10.1098/rspb.2000.0986 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2000.0986). PMC 1690512 (https://ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1690512). PMID 10687826 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10
687826). (Erratum in Proceedings of the Royal Society B 267(1461):2567.)
175. Klaassen, Marc (1 January 1996). "Metabolic constraints on long-distance migration in birds" (http://j
eb.biologists.org/cgi/reprint/199/1/57). Journal of Experimental Biology. 199 (1): 57–64.
Bibcode:1996JExpB.199...57K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1996JExpB.199...57K).
doi:10.1242/jeb.199.1.57 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.199.1.57). PMID 9317335 (https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9317335).
176. "Long-distance Godwit sets new record" (https://web.archive.org/web/20131002131732/http://www.bi
rdlife.org/news/news/2007/04/bar-tailed_godwit_journey.html). BirdLife International. 4 May 2007.
Archived from the original (http://www.birdlife.org/news/news/2007/04/bar-tailed_godwit_journey.htm
l) on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2007.
177. Egevang, Carsten; Stenhouse, Iain J.; Phillips, Richard A.; Petersen, Aevar; Fox, James W.; Silk,
Janet R. D. (2010). "Tracking of Arctic terns Sterna paradisaea reveals longest animal migration" (htt
ps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2836663). Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 107 (5): 2078–2081. Bibcode:2010PNAS..107.2078E (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2
010PNAS..107.2078E). doi:10.1073/pnas.0909493107 (https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.090949310
7). PMC 2836663 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2836663). PMID 20080662 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20080662).
178. Shaffer, Scott A.; et al. (2006). "Migratory shearwaters integrate oceanic resources across the Pacific
Ocean in an endless summer" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1568927).
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 103 (34): 12799–
12802. Bibcode:2006PNAS..10312799S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2006PNAS..10312799
S). doi:10.1073/pnas.0603715103 (https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.0603715103). PMC 1568927 (ht
tps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1568927). PMID 16908846 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.ni
h.gov/16908846).
179. Croxall, John P.; Silk, J. R.; Phillips, R. A.; Afanasyev, V.; Briggs, D. R. (2005). "Global
Circumnavigations: Tracking year-round ranges of nonbreeding Albatrosses". Science. 307 (5707):
249–250. Bibcode:2005Sci...307..249C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005Sci...307..249C).
doi:10.1126/science.1106042 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1106042). PMID 15653503 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15653503).
180. Wilson, W. Herbert Jr. (1999). "Bird feeding and irruptions of northern finches:are migrations short
stopped?" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140729162642/https://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/jour
nals/nabb/v024n04/p0113-p0121.pdf) (PDF). North America Bird Bander. 24 (4): 113–121. Archived
from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/nabb/v024n04/p0113-p0121.pdf)
(PDF) on 29 July 2014.
181. Nilsson, Anna L.K.; Alerstam, Thomas; Nilsson, Jan-Åke (2006). "Do partial and regular migrants
differ in their responses to weather?" (https://doi.org/10.1642%2F0004-8038%282006%29123%5B5
37%3ADPARMD%5D2.0.CO%3B2). The Auk. 123 (2): 537–547. doi:10.1642/0004-
8038(2006)123[537:DPARMD]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1642%2F0004-8038%282006%29123%5
B537%3ADPARMD%5D2.0.CO%3B2).
182. Chan, Ken (2001). "Partial migration in Australian landbirds: a review". Emu. 101 (4): 281–292.
Bibcode:2001EmuAO.101..281C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001EmuAO.101..281C).
doi:10.1071/MU00034 (https://doi.org/10.1071%2FMU00034).
183. Rabenold, Kerry N. (1985). "Variation in Altitudinal Migration, Winter Segregation, and Site Tenacity
in two subspecies of Dark-eyed Juncos in the southern Appalachians" (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/def
ault/files/journals/auk/v102n04/p0805-p0819.pdf) (PDF). The Auk. 102 (4): 805–819. Archived (http
s://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v102n04/p
0805-p0819.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
184. Collar, Nigel J. (1997). "Family Psittacidae (Parrots)". In Josep del Hoyo; Andrew Elliott; Jordi
Sargatal (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Vol. 4: Sandgrouse to Cuckoos. Barcelona:
Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-22-9.
185. Matthews, G.V.T. (1 September 1953). "Navigation in the Manx Shearwater" (https://doi.org/10.124
2%2Fjeb.30.3.370). Journal of Experimental Biology. 30 (2): 370–396.
Bibcode:1953JExpB..30..370M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1953JExpB..30..370M).
doi:10.1242/jeb.30.3.370 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.30.3.370).
186. Mouritsen, Henrik; Larsen, Ole Næsbye (15 November 2001). "Migrating songbirds tested in
computer-controlled Emlen funnels use stellar cues for a time-independent compass" (https://doi.org/
10.1242%2Fjeb.204.22.3855). Journal of Experimental Biology. 204 (8): 3855–3865.
Bibcode:2001JExpB.204.3855M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001JExpB.204.3855M).
doi:10.1242/jeb.204.22.3855 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.204.22.3855). PMID 11807103 (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11807103).
187. Deutschlander, Mark E.; Phillips, J. B.; Borland, S. C. (15 April 1999). "The case for light-dependent
magnetic orientation in animals" (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.202.8.891). Journal of Experimental
Biology. 202 (8): 891–908. Bibcode:1999JExpB.202..891D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999J
ExpB.202..891D). doi:10.1242/jeb.202.8.891 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.202.8.891).
PMID 10085262 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10085262).
188. Möller, Anders Pape (1988). "Badge size in the house sparrow Passer domesticus" (https://www.rese
archgate.net/publication/226147226). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 22 (5): 373–378.
doi:10.1007/BF00295107 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF00295107). JSTOR 4600164 (https://www.j
stor.org/stable/4600164).
189. Thomas, Betsy Trent; Strahl (1 August 1990). "Nesting Behavior of Sunbitterns (Eurypyga helias) in
Venezuela" (https://web.archive.org/web/20160305194240/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/jour
nals/condor/v092n03/p0576-p0581.pdf) (PDF). The Condor. 92 (3): 576–581. doi:10.2307/1368675
(https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1368675). JSTOR 1368675 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1368675).
Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v092n03/p0576-p05
81.pdf) (PDF) on 5 March 2016.
190. Pickering, S. P. C. (2001). "Courtship behaviour of the Wandering Albatross Diomedea exulans at
Bird Island, South Georgia" (http://www.marineornithology.org/PDF/29_1/29_1_6.pdf) (PDF). Marine
Ornithology. 29 (1): 29–37. doi:10.5038/2074-1235.29.1.488 (https://doi.org/10.5038%2F2074-1235.
29.1.488). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://www.marineornithology.org/PD
F/29_1/29_1_6.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
191. Pruett-Jones, S.G.; Pruett-Jones (1 May 1990). "Sexual Selection Through Female Choice in Lawes'
Parotia, A Lek-Mating Bird of Paradise" (https://archive.org/details/sim_evolution_1990-05_44_3/pag
e/486). Evolution. 44 (3): 486–501. doi:10.2307/2409431 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2409431).
JSTOR 2409431 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2409431). PMID 28567971 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.ni
h.gov/28567971).
192. Genevois, F.; Bretagnolle, V. (September 1994). "Male blue petrels reveal their body mass when
calling". Ethology Ecology & Evolution. 6 (3): 377–383. Bibcode:1994EtEcE...6..377G (https://ui.adsa
bs.harvard.edu/abs/1994EtEcE...6..377G). doi:10.1080/08927014.1994.9522988 (https://doi.org/10.
1080%2F08927014.1994.9522988).
193. Roy, Suhridam; Kittur, Swati; Sundar, K. S. Gopi (2022). "Sarus crane Antigone antigone trios and
their triets: Discovery of a novel social unit in cranes". Ecology. 103 (6) e3707.
Bibcode:2022Ecol..103E3707R (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022Ecol..103E3707R).
doi:10.1002/ecy.3707 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fecy.3707). PMID 35357696 (https://pubmed.ncbi.n
lm.nih.gov/35357696).
194. Jouventin, Pierre; Aubin, T; Lengagne, T (June 1999). "Finding a parent in a king penguin colony: the
acoustic system of individual recognition". Animal Behaviour. 57 (6): 1175–1183.
Bibcode:1999AnBeh..57.1175J (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999AnBeh..57.1175J).
doi:10.1006/anbe.1999.1086 (https://doi.org/10.1006%2Fanbe.1999.1086). PMID 10373249 (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10373249).
195. Templeton, Christopher N.; Greene, E; Davis, K (2005). "Allometry of Alarm Calls: Black-Capped
Chickadees Encode Information About Predator Size". Science. 308 (5730): 1934–1937.
Bibcode:2005Sci...308.1934T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005Sci...308.1934T).
doi:10.1126/science.1108841 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1108841). PMID 15976305 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15976305).
196. Miskelly, C. M. (July 1987). "The identity of the hakawai". Notornis. 34 (2): 95–116.
197. Dodenhoff, Danielle J.; Stark, Robert D.; Johnson, Eric V. (2001). "Do woodpecker drums encode
information for species recognition?" (https://doi.org/10.1650%2F0010-5422%282001%29103%5B0
143%3ADWDEIF%5D2.0.CO%3B2). The Condor. 103 (1): 143. doi:10.1650/0010-
5422(2001)103[0143:DWDEIF]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1650%2F0010-5422%282001%29103%5
B0143%3ADWDEIF%5D2.0.CO%3B2).
198. Murphy, Stephen; Legge, Sarah; Heinsohn, Robert (2003). "The breeding biology of palm cockatoos
(Probosciger aterrimus): a case of a slow life history". Journal of Zoology. 261 (4): 327–339.
Bibcode:2003JZoo..261..327M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003JZoo..261..327M).
doi:10.1017/S0952836903004175 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0952836903004175).
199. Sekercioglu, Cagan Hakki (2006). "Foreword". In Josep del Hoyo; Andrew Elliott; David Christie
(eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Vol. 11: Old World Flycatchers to Old World Warblers.
Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. p. 48. ISBN 84-96553-06-X.
200. Terborgh, John (2005). "Mixed flocks and polyspecific associations: Costs and benefits of mixed
groups to birds and monkeys". American Journal of Primatology. 21 (2): 87–100.
doi:10.1002/ajp.1350210203 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fajp.1350210203). PMID 31963979 (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31963979).
201. Hutto, Richard L. (January 1988). "Foraging Behavior Patterns Suggest a Possible Cost Associated
with Participation in Mixed-Species Bird Flocks". Oikos. 51 (1): 79–83. Bibcode:1988Oikos..51...79H
(https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1988Oikos..51...79H). doi:10.2307/3565809 (https://doi.org/10.23
07%2F3565809). JSTOR 3565809 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3565809).
202. Sundar, K. S. Gopi; Grant, John D. A.; Veltheim, Inka; Kittur, Swati; Brandis, Kate; McCarthy, Michael
A.; Scambler, Elinor (2019). "Sympatric cranes in northern Australia: abundance, breeding success,
habitat preference and diet". Emu - Austral Ornithology. 119 (1): 79–89.
Bibcode:2019EmuAO.119...79S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019EmuAO.119...79S).
doi:10.1080/01584197.2018.1537673 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F01584197.2018.1537673).
hdl:1959.4/unsworks_52806 (https://hdl.handle.net/1959.4%2Funsworks_52806).
203. Au, David W.K.; Pitman (1 August 1986). "Seabird interactions with Dolphins and Tuna in the
Eastern Tropical Pacific" (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v088n03/p0304-p031
7.pdf) (PDF). The Condor. 88 (3): 304–317. doi:10.2307/1368877 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F13688
77). JSTOR 1368877 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1368877). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archi
ve/20221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v088n03/p0304-p0317.pdf)
(PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
204. Anne, O.; Rasa, E. (June 1983). "Dwarf mongoose and hornbill mutualism in the Taru desert,
Kenya". Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 12 (3): 181–190. Bibcode:1983BEcoS..12..181A (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983BEcoS..12..181A). doi:10.1007/BF00290770 (https://doi.org/10.1
007%2FBF00290770).
205. Gauthier-Clerc, Michel; Tamisier, Alain; Cézilly, Frank (2000). "Sleep-Vigilance Trade-Off in Gadwall
During the Winter Period". The Condor. 102 (2): 307. doi:10.1650/0010-
5422(2000)102[0307:SVTOIG]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1650%2F0010-5422%282000%29102%5
B0307%3ASVTOIG%5D2.0.CO%3B2). JSTOR 1369642 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1369642).
206. Bäckman, Johan; A (1 April 2002). "Harmonic oscillatory orientation relative to the wind in nocturnal
roosting flights of the swift Apus apus" (http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/content/full/205/7/905). The
Journal of Experimental Biology. 205 (7): 905–910. Bibcode:2002JExpB.205..905B (https://ui.adsab
s.harvard.edu/abs/2002JExpB.205..905B). doi:10.1242/jeb.205.7.905 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fje
b.205.7.905). PMID 11916987 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11916987).
207. Rattenborg, Niels C. (2006). "Do birds sleep in flight?". Die Naturwissenschaften. 93 (9): 413–425.
Bibcode:2006NW.....93..413R (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2006NW.....93..413R).
doi:10.1007/s00114-006-0120-3 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs00114-006-0120-3). PMID 16688436
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16688436).
208. Milius, S. (6 February 1999). "Half-asleep birds choose which half dozes". Science News Online. 155
(6): 86. doi:10.2307/4011301 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4011301). JSTOR 4011301 (https://www.js
tor.org/stable/4011301).
209. Beauchamp, Guy (1999). "The evolution of communal roosting in birds: origin and secondary losses"
(https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F10.6.675). Behavioral Ecology. 10 (6): 675–687.
doi:10.1093/beheco/10.6.675 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F10.6.675).
210. Buttemer, William A. (1985). "Energy relations of winter roost-site utilization by American goldfinches
(Carduelis tristis)". Oecologia. 68 (1): 126–132. Bibcode:1985Oecol..68..126B (https://ui.adsabs.harv
ard.edu/abs/1985Oecol..68..126B). doi:10.1007/BF00379484 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF003794
84). hdl:2027.42/47760 (https://hdl.handle.net/2027.42%2F47760). PMID 28310921 (https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28310921).
211. Palmer, Meredith S.; Packer, Craig (2018). "Giraffe bed and breakfast: Camera traps reveal
Tanzanian yellow-billed oxpeckers roosting on their large mammalian hosts" (https://doi.org/10.111
1%2Faje.12505). African Journal of Ecology. 56 (4): 882–884. Bibcode:2018AfJEc..56..882P (https://
ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018AfJEc..56..882P). doi:10.1111/aje.12505 (https://doi.org/10.1111%2
Faje.12505).
212. Buckley, F.G.; Buckley (1 January 1968). "Upside-down Resting by Young Green-Rumped Parrotlets
(Forpus passerinus)" (https://archive.org/details/sim_condor_1968-01_70_1/page/89). The Condor.
70 (1): 89. doi:10.2307/1366517 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1366517). JSTOR 1366517 (https://ww
w.jstor.org/stable/1366517).
213. Carpenter, F. Lynn (1974). "Torpor in an Andean Hummingbird: Its Ecological Significance". Science.
183 (4124): 545–547. Bibcode:1974Sci...183..545C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1974Sci...18
3..545C). doi:10.1126/science.183.4124.545 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.183.4124.545).
PMID 17773043 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17773043).
214. McKechnie, Andrew E.; Ashdown, Robert A.M.; Christian, Murray B.; Brigham, R. Mark (2007).
"Torpor in an African caprimulgid, the freckled nightjar Caprimulgus tristigma". Journal of Avian
Biology. 38 (3): 261–266. Bibcode:2007JAvBi..38..261M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007JAv
Bi..38..261M). doi:10.1111/j.2007.0908-8857.04116.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.2007.0908-8857.
04116.x).
215. Gill, Frank B.; Prum, Richard O. (2019). Ornithology (4 ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman. pp. 390–396.
216. Cabello-Vergel, Julián; Soriano-Redondo, Andrea; Villegas, Auxiliadora; Masero, José A.; Guzmán,
Juan M. Sánchez; Gutiérrez, Jorge S. (2021). "Urohidrosis as an overlooked cooling mechanism in
long-legged birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8501033). Scientific Reports. 11
(1): 20018. Bibcode:2021NatSR..1120018C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021NatSR..112001
8C). doi:10.1038/s41598-021-99296-8 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41598-021-99296-8).
PMC 8501033 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8501033). PMID 34625581 (https://pu
bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34625581).
217. Frith, C. B. (1981). "Displays of Count Raggi's Bird-of-Paradise Paradisaea raggiana and congeneric
species" (http://www.publish.csiro.au/paper/MU9810193.htm). Emu. 81 (4): 193–201.
Bibcode:1981EmuAO..81..193F (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1981EmuAO..81..193F).
doi:10.1071/MU9810193 (https://doi.org/10.1071%2FMU9810193).
218. Freed, Leonard A. (1987). "The Long-Term Pair Bond of Tropical House Wrens: Advantage or
Constraint?". The American Naturalist. 130 (4): 507–525. Bibcode:1987ANat..130..507F (https://ui.a
dsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1987ANat..130..507F). doi:10.1086/284728 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F2847
28).
219. Gowaty, Patricia A. (1983). "Male Parental Care and Apparent Monogamy among Eastern Bluebirds
(Sialia sialis)". The American Naturalist. 121 (2): 149–160. Bibcode:1983ANat..121..149G (https://ui.
adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983ANat..121..149G). doi:10.1086/284047 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F28
4047).
220. Westneat, David F.; Stewart, Ian R.K. (2003). "Extra-pair paternity in birds: Causes, correlates, and
conflict". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. 34: 365–396.
doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.34.011802.132439 (https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev.ecolsys.34.011
802.132439).
221. Gowaty, Patricia A.; Buschhaus, Nancy (1998). "Ultimate causation of aggressive and forced
copulation in birds: Female resistance, the CODE hypothesis, and social monogamy" (https://doi.org/
10.1093%2Ficb%2F38.1.207). American Zoologist. 38 (1): 207–225. doi:10.1093/icb/38.1.207 (http
s://doi.org/10.1093%2Ficb%2F38.1.207).
222. Sheldon, B (1994). "Male Phenotype, Fertility, and the Pursuit of Extra-Pair Copulations by Female
Birds". Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 257 (1348): 25–30. Bibcode:1994RSPSB.257...25S (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1994RSPSB.257...25S). doi:10.1098/rspb.1994.0089 (https://doi.org/1
0.1098%2Frspb.1994.0089).
223. Wei, G; Zuo-Hua, Yin; Fu-Min, Lei (2005). "Copulations and mate guarding of the Chinese Egret".
Waterbirds. 28 (4): 527–530. doi:10.1675/1524-4695(2005)28[527:CAMGOT]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.or
g/10.1675%2F1524-4695%282005%2928%5B527%3ACAMGOT%5D2.0.CO%3B2).
224. Owens, Ian P. F.; Bennett, Peter M. (1997). "Variation in mating system among birds: ecological
basis revealed by hierarchical comparative analysis of mate desertion" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/pmc/articles/PMC1688567). Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological
Sciences. 264 (1385): 1103–1110. Bibcode:1997PBioS.264.1103O (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/a
bs/1997PBioS.264.1103O). doi:10.1098/rspb.1997.0152 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.1997.015
2). PMC 1688567 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1688567).
225. Petrie, Marion; Kempenaers, Bart (1998). "Extra-pair paternity in birds: explaining variation between
species and populations". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 13 (2): 52–58.
Bibcode:1998TEcoE..13...52P (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998TEcoE..13...52P).
doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(97)01232-9 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0169-5347%2897%2901232-9).
PMID 21238200 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21238200).
226. Barve, Sahas; Riehl, C.; Walters, E. L.; Haydock, J.; Dugdale, H. L.; Koenig, W. D. (2021). "Lifetime
Reproductive Benefits of Cooperative Polygamy Vary for Males and Females in the Acorn
Woodpecker (Melanerpes formicivorus)" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8370801).
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1957) 20210579.
doi:10.1098/rspb.2021.0579 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2021.0579). PMC 8370801 (https://ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8370801). PMID 34403633 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34
403633).
227. Short, Lester L. (1993). Birds of the World and their Behavior (https://archive.org/details/livesofbirdsb
ird00shor). New York: Henry Holt and Co. ISBN 0-8050-1952-9.
228. Burton, R (1985). Bird Behavior (https://archive.org/details/birdbehavior0000burt). Alfred A. Knopf,
Inc. ISBN 0-394-53957-5.
229. Schamel, D; Tracy, Diane M.; Lank, David B.; Westneat, David F. (2004). "Mate guarding, copulation
strategies and paternity in the sex-role reversed, socially polyandrous red-necked phalarope
Phalaropus lobatus". Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 57 (2): 110–118.
Bibcode:2004BEcoS..57..110S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004BEcoS..57..110S).
doi:10.1007/s00265-004-0825-2 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs00265-004-0825-2).
230. Attenborough, David (1998). The Life of Birds. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-
01633-X.
231. Bagemihl, Bruce (1999). Biological exuberance: Animal homosexuality and natural diversity. New
York: St. Martin's. pp. 479–655.
232. MacFarlane, Geoff R.; Blomberg, Simon P.; Kaplan, Gisela; Rogers, Lesley J. (January 2007).
"Same-sex sexual behavior in birds: expression is related to social mating system and state of
development at hatching". Behavioral Ecology. 18 (1): 21–33. doi:10.1093/beheco/arl065 (https://doi.
org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Farl065). hdl:10.1093/beheco/arl065 (https://hdl.handle.net/10.1093%2F
beheco%2Farl065).
233. Kokko, H; Harris, M; Wanless, S (2004). "Competition for breeding sites and site-dependent
population regulation in a highly colonial seabird, the common guillemot Uria aalge" (https://doi.org/1
0.1111%2Fj.0021-8790.2004.00813.x). Journal of Animal Ecology. 73 (2): 367–376.
Bibcode:2004JAnEc..73..367K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004JAnEc..73..367K).
doi:10.1111/j.0021-8790.2004.00813.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0021-8790.2004.00813.x).
234. Booker, L; Booker, M (1991). "Why Are Cuckoos Host Specific?". Oikos. 57 (3): 301–309.
doi:10.2307/3565958 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3565958). JSTOR 3565958 (https://www.jstor.org/s
table/3565958).
235. Hansell, M (2000). Bird Nests and Construction Behaviour. University of Cambridge Press. ISBN 0-
521-46038-7.
236. Lafuma, L.; Lambrechts, M.; Raymond, M. (2001). "Aromatic plants in bird nests as a protection
against blood-sucking flying insects?". Behavioural Processes. 56 (2): 113–120.
Bibcode:2001BehPr..56..113L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001BehPr..56..113L).
doi:10.1016/S0376-6357(01)00191-7 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0376-6357%2801%2900191-7).
PMID 11672937 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11672937).
237. Collias, Nicholas E.; Collias, Elsie C. (1984). Nest building and bird behavior. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. pp. 16–17, 26. ISBN 0-691-08358-4.
238. Warham, J. (1990). The Petrels: Their Ecology and Breeding Systems. London: Academic Press.
ISBN 0-12-735420-4.
239. Jones, DN; Dekker, René WRJ; Roselaar, Cees S (1995). "The Megapodes". Bird Families of the
World 3. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-854651-3.
240. "AnAge: The animal ageing and longevity database" (http://genomics.senescence.info/species/).
Human Ageing and Genomics Resources. Retrieved 26 September 2014.
241. "Animal diversity web" (http://animaldiversity.ummz.umich.edu/). University of Michigan, Museum of
Zoology. Retrieved 26 September 2014.
242. Urfi, A. J. (2011). The Painted Stork: Ecology and Conservation (https://books.google.com/books?id
=_9tczTapYXMC&pg=PA88). Springer Science & Business Media. p. 88. ISBN 978-1-4419-8468-5.
243. Khanna, D. R. (2005). Biology of Birds (https://books.google.com/books?id=fDblIChi7KwC&pg=PA10
9). Discovery Publishing House. p. 109. ISBN 978-81-7141-933-3.
244. Scott, Lynnette (2008). Wildlife Rehabilitation (https://books.google.com/books?id=FpAOAQAAMAA
J). National Wildlife Rehabilitators Association. p. 50. ISBN 978-1-931439-23-7.
245. Elliot, A (1994). "Family Megapodiidae (Megapodes)". In del Hoyo, J.; Elliott, A.; Sargatal, J. (eds.).
Handbook of the Birds of the World. Vol. 2: New World Vultures to Guineafowl. Barcelona: Lynx
Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-15-6.
246. Metz, V. G.; Schreiber, E. A. (2002). "Great Frigatebird (Fregata minor)". In Poole, A.; Gill, F. (eds.).
The Birds of North America, No 681. Philadelphia: The Birds of North America Inc.
247. Young, Euan (1994). Skua and Penguin. Predator and Prey. Cambridge University Press. p. 453.
248. Ekman, J. (2006). "Family living amongst birds". Journal of Avian Biology. 37 (4): 289–298.
Bibcode:2006JAvBi..37..289E (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2006JAvBi..37..289E).
doi:10.1111/j.2006.0908-8857.03666.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.2006.0908-8857.03666.x).
249. Cockburn A (1996). "Why do so many Australian birds cooperate? Social evolution in the Corvida". In
Floyd R, Sheppard A, de Barro P (eds.). Frontiers in Population Ecology. Melbourne: CSIRO.
pp. 21–42.
250. Cockburn, Andrew (2006). "Prevalence of different modes of parental care in birds" (https://www.ncb
i.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1560291). Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 273 (1592): 1375–
1383. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3458 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2005.3458). PMC 1560291 (http
s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1560291). PMID 16777726 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/16777726).
251. Gaston, AJ (1994). "Ancient Murrelet (Synthliboramphus antiquus)". In Poole, A.; Gill, F. (eds.). The
Birds of North America, No. 132. Philadelphia & Washington, D.C.: The Academy of Natural
Sciences & The American Ornithologists' Union.
252. Schaefer, H. C.; Eshiamwata, G. W.; Munyekenye, F. B.; Böhning-Gaese, K. (2004). "Life-history of
two African Sylvia warblers: low annual fecundity and long post-fledging care". Ibis. 146 (3): 427–
437. Bibcode:2004Ibis..146..427S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004Ibis..146..427S).
doi:10.1111/j.1474-919X.2004.00276.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1474-919X.2004.00276.x).
253. Alonso, J. C.; Bautista, L. M.; Alonso, J. A. (2004). "Family-based territoriality vs flocking in wintering
common cranes Grus grus". Journal of Avian Biology. 35 (5): 434–444. doi:10.1111/j.0908-
8857.2004.03290.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0908-8857.2004.03290.x). hdl:10261/43767 (http
s://hdl.handle.net/10261%2F43767).
254. Davies, N. (2000). Cuckoos, Cowbirds and other Cheats. London: T. & A. D. Poyser. ISBN 0-85661-
135-2.
255. Sorenson, M. (1997). "Effects of intra- and interspecific brood parasitism on a precocial host, the
canvasback, Aythya valisineria" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F8.2.153). Behavioral
Ecology. 8 (2): 153–161. doi:10.1093/beheco/8.2.153 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F8.2.15
3).
256. Spottiswoode, C. N.; Colebrook-Robjent, J. F. R. (2007). "Egg puncturing by the brood parasitic
Greater Honeyguide and potential host counteradaptations" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F
arm025). Behavioral Ecology. 18 (4): 792–799. doi:10.1093/beheco/arm025 (https://doi.org/10.109
3%2Fbeheco%2Farm025). hdl:10.1093/beheco/arm025 (https://hdl.handle.net/10.1093%2Fbehec
o%2Farm025).
257. Edwards, DB (2012). "Immune investment is explained by sexual selection and pace-of-life, but not
longevity in parrots (Psittaciformes)" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3531452).
PLOS ONE. 7 (12) e53066. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...753066E (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012
PLoSO...753066E). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0053066 (https://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.005
3066). PMC 3531452 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3531452). PMID 23300862 (htt
ps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23300862).
258. Doutrelant, C; Grégoire, A; Midamegbe, A; Lambrechts, M; Perret, P (January 2012). "Female
plumage coloration is sensitive to the cost of reproduction. An experiment in blue tits" (https://doi.org/
10.1111%2Fj.1365-2656.2011.01889.x). Journal of Animal Ecology. 81 (1): 87–96.
Bibcode:2012JAnEc..81...87D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012JAnEc..81...87D).
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2656.2011.01889.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1365-2656.2011.01889.x).
PMID 21819397 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21819397).
259. Hemmings NL, Slate J, Birkhead TR (2012). "Inbreeding causes early death in a passerine bird" (htt
ps://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms1870). Nat Commun. 3 863. Bibcode:2012NatCo...3..863H (https://
ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012NatCo...3..863H). doi:10.1038/ncomms1870 (https://doi.org/10.103
8%2Fncomms1870). PMID 22643890 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22643890).
260. Hemmings, N. L.; Slate, J.; Birkhead, T. R. (29 May 2012). "Inbreeding causes early death in a
passerine bird" (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms1870). Nature Communications. 3 (1): 863.
Bibcode:2012NatCo...3..863H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012NatCo...3..863H).
doi:10.1038/ncomms1870 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms1870). PMID 22643890 (https://pubm
ed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22643890).
261. Keller LF, Grant PR, Grant BR, Petren K (2002). "Environmental conditions affect the magnitude of
inbreeding depression in survival of Darwin's finches". Evolution. 56 (6): 1229–1239.
doi:10.1111/j.0014-3820.2002.tb01434.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0014-3820.2002.tb01434.x).
PMID 12144022 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12144022).
262. Kingma, SA; Hall, ML; Peters, A (2013). "Breeding synchronization facilitates extrapair mating for
inbreeding avoidance" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Fart078). Behavioral Ecology. 24 (6):
1390–1397. doi:10.1093/beheco/art078 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Fart078).
hdl:10.1093/beheco/art078 (https://hdl.handle.net/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Fart078).
263. Szulkin M, Sheldon BC (2008). "Dispersal as a means of inbreeding avoidance in a wild bird
population" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2596843). Proc. Biol. Sci. 275 (1635):
703–711. doi:10.1098/rspb.2007.0989 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2007.0989). PMC 2596843
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2596843). PMID 18211876 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/18211876).
264. Nelson-Flower MJ, Hockey PA, O'Ryan C, Ridley AR (2012). "Inbreeding avoidance mechanisms:
dispersal dynamics in cooperatively breeding southern pied babblers" (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1
365-2656.2012.01983.x). J Anim Ecol. 81 (4): 876–883. Bibcode:2012JAnEc..81..876N (https://ui.ad
sabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012JAnEc..81..876N). doi:10.1111/j.1365-2656.2012.01983.x (https://doi.org/
10.1111%2Fj.1365-2656.2012.01983.x). PMID 22471769 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2247176
9).
265. Riehl C, Stern CA (2015). "How cooperatively breeding birds identify relatives and avoid incest: New
insights into dispersal and kin recognition". BioEssays. 37 (12): 1303–1308.
doi:10.1002/bies.201500120 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fbies.201500120). PMID 26577076 (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26577076).
266. Charlesworth D, Willis JH (2009). "The genetics of inbreeding depression". Nat. Rev. Genet. 10 (11):
783–796. doi:10.1038/nrg2664 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnrg2664). PMID 19834483 (https://pubm
ed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19834483).
267. Bernstein H, Hopf FA, Michod RE (1987). "The Molecular Basis of the Evolution of Sex". Molecular
Genetics of Development. Advances in Genetics. Vol. 24. pp. 323–370. doi:10.1016/s0065-
2660(08)60012-7 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fs0065-2660%2808%2960012-7). ISBN 978-0-12-
017624-3. PMID 3324702 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3324702).
268. Michod, R.E. (1994). Eros and Evolution: A Natural Philosophy of Sex. Reading, Massachusetts:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-201-44232-8.
269. Gong, Lixin; Shi, Biye; Wu, Hui; Feng, Jiang; Jiang, Tinglei (2021). "Who's for dinner? Bird prey
diversity and choice in the great evening bat, Ia io" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8
258197). Ecology and Evolution. 11 (13): 8400–8409. Bibcode:2021EcoEv..11.8400G (https://ui.ads
abs.harvard.edu/abs/2021EcoEv..11.8400G). doi:10.1002/ece3.7667 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fec
e3.7667). PMC 8258197 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8258197). PMID 34257905
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34257905).
270. Križanauskienė, Asta; Hellgren, Olof; Kosarev, Vladislav; Sokolov, Leonid; Bensch, Staffan;
Valkiūnas, Gediminas (2006). "Variation in host specificity between species of avian hemosporidian
parasites: evidence from parasite morphology and cytochrome b gene sequences". Journal of
Parasitology. 92 (6): 1319–1324. Bibcode:2006JPara..92.1319K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2
006JPara..92.1319K). doi:10.1645/GE-873R.1 (https://doi.org/10.1645%2FGE-873R.1).
PMID 17304814 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17304814).
271. Clout, M; Hay, J (1989). "The importance of birds as browsers, pollinators and seed dispersers in
New Zealand forests" (http://www.newzealandecology.org/nzje/free_issues/NZJEcol12_s_27.pdf)
(PDF). New Zealand Journal of Ecology. 12: 27–33.
272. Stiles, F. Gary (1981). "Geographical Aspects of Bird-Flower Coevolution, with Particular Reference
to Central America" (https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/part/38387). Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden. 68 (2): 323–351. Bibcode:1981AnMBG..68..323S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1981A
nMBG..68..323S). doi:10.2307/2398801 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2398801). JSTOR 2398801 (htt
ps://www.jstor.org/stable/2398801).
273. Temeles, Ethan J.; Linhart, Yan B.; Masonjones, Michael; Masonjones, Heather D. (March 2002).
"The Role of Flower Width in Hummingbird Bill Length-Flower Length Relationships 1". Biotropica.
34 (1): 68–80. Bibcode:2002Biotr..34...68T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002Biotr..34...68T).
doi:10.1111/j.1744-7429.2002.tb00243.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1744-7429.2002.tb00243.x).
274. Bond, William J.; Lee, William G.; Craine, Joseph M. (2004). "Plant structural defences against
browsing birds: a legacy of New Zealand's extinct moas". Oikos. 104 (3): 500–508.
Bibcode:2004Oikos.104..500B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004Oikos.104..500B).
doi:10.1111/j.0030-1299.2004.12720.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0030-1299.2004.12720.x).
275. Berner, Lewis; Hicks, Ellis A. (June 1959). "Checklist and Bibliography on the Occurrence of Insects
in Birds Nests" (http://archive.org/details/checklistbibliog00hick). The Florida Entomologist. 42 (2):
92. doi:10.2307/3492142 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3492142). JSTOR 3492142 (https://www.jstor.o
rg/stable/3492142).
276. Boyes, Douglas H.; Lewis, Owen T. (2019). "Ecology of Lepidoptera associated with bird nests in
mid-Wales, UK" (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Feen.12669). Ecological Entomology. 44 (1): 1–10.
Bibcode:2019EcoEn..44....1B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019EcoEn..44....1B).
doi:10.1111/een.12669 (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Feen.12669).
277. Wainright, S.; Haney, J.; Kerr, C.; Golovkin, A.; Flint, M. (1998). "Utilization of nitrogen derived from
seabird guano by terrestrial and marine plants at St. Paul, Pribilof Islands, Bering Sea, Alaska".
Marine Biology. 131 (1): 63–71. Bibcode:1998MarBi.131...63W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/19
98MarBi.131...63W). doi:10.1007/s002270050297 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs002270050297).
278. Bosman, A.; Hockey, A. (1986). "Seabird guano as a determinant of rocky intertidal community
structure" (https://doi.org/10.3354%2Fmeps032247). Marine Ecology Progress Series. 32: 247–257.
Bibcode:1986MEPS...32..247B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1986MEPS...32..247B).
doi:10.3354/meps032247 (https://doi.org/10.3354%2Fmeps032247).
279. Sutherland, William J.; Newton, Ian; Green, Rhys E. (2004). Bird Ecology and Conservation. A
Handbook of Techniques. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-852085-9.
280. Bonney, Rick; Rohrbaugh, Ronald Jr. (2004). Handbook of Bird Biology (Second ed.). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-938027-62-X.
281. Dean, W. R. J.; Siegfried, W. ROY; MacDonald, I. A. W. (1990). "The Fallacy, Fact, and Fate of
Guiding Behavior in the Greater Honeyguide". Conservation Biology. 4 (1): 99–101.
Bibcode:1990ConBi...4...99D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1990ConBi...4...99D).
doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.1990.tb00272.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1523-1739.1990.tb00272.x).
282. Singer, R.; Yom-Tov, Y. (1988). "The Breeding Biology of the House Sparrow Passer domesticus in
Israel". Ornis Scandinavica. 19 (2): 139–144. doi:10.2307/3676463 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3676
463). JSTOR 3676463 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3676463).
283. Sundar, K. S. Gopi (2009). "Are rice paddies suboptimal breeding habitat for Sarus Cranes in Uttar
Pradesh, India?". The Condor. 111 (4): 611–623. doi:10.1525/cond.2009.080032 (https://doi.org/10.
1525%2Fcond.2009.080032).
284. Kittur, Swati; Sundar, K. S. Gopi (2021). "Of irrigation canals and multifunctional agroforestry:
Traditional agriculture facilitates Woolly-necked Stork breeding in a north Indian agricultural
landscape" (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.gecco.2021.e01793). Global Ecology and Conservation. 30
e01793. Bibcode:2021GEcoC..3001793K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021GEcoC..3001793
K). doi:10.1016/j.gecco.2021.e01793 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.gecco.2021.e01793).
285. Dolbeer, Richard (1990). "Ornithology and integrated pest management: Red-winged blackbirds
Agleaius phoeniceus and corn" (https://zenodo.org/record/1230653). Ibis. 132 (2): 309–322.
Bibcode:1990Ibis..132..309D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1990Ibis..132..309D).
doi:10.1111/j.1474-919X.1990.tb01048.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1474-919X.1990.tb01048.x).
286. Dolbeer, R.; Belant, J.; Sillings, J. (1993). "Shooting Gulls Reduces Strikes with Aircraft at John F.
Kennedy International Airport". Wildlife Society Bulletin. 21: 442–450.
287. Bryce, Emma (16 March 2016). "Will Wind Turbines Ever Be Safe for Birds?" (http://www.audubon.or
g/news/will-wind-turbines-ever-be-safe-birds). Audubon. US: National Audubon Society. Retrieved
19 March 2017.
288. Zimmer, Carl (19 September 2019). "Birds Are Vanishing From North America" (https://www.nytimes.
com/2019/09/19/science/bird-populations-america-canada.html?campaign_id=60&instance_id=0&se
gment_id=17168&user_id=579ae23cfcbd75c9aac87cb571cc201c&regi_id=72995439ing-news). The
New York Times. Retrieved 19 September 2019.
289. Reed, K. D.; Meece, J. K.; Henkel, J. S.; Shukla, S. K. (2003). "Birds, Migration and Emerging
Zoonoses: West Nile Virus, Lyme Disease, Influenza A and Enteropathogens" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1069015). Clinical Medicine & Research. 1 (1): 5–12.
doi:10.3121/cmr.1.1.5 (https://doi.org/10.3121%2Fcmr.1.1.5). PMC 1069015 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.ni
h.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1069015). PMID 15931279 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15931279).
290. Brown, Lester (2005). "3: Moving Up the Food Chain Efficiently." (http://www.earth-policy.org/datacen
ter/xls/book_ote_ch3_2.xls). Outgrowing the Earth: The Food Security Challenge in an Age of Falling
Water Tables and Rising Temperatures. earthscan. ISBN 978-1-84407-185-2.
291. "Poultry species: Gateway to poultry production and products" (https://www.fao.org/poultry-productio
n-products/production/poultry-species/en/). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
FAO. Retrieved 27 January 2023.
292. Griffith, Edward; Wood, W.; Davison, Thomas (1821). General and particular descriptions of the
vertebrated animals: Arranged conformably to the modern discoveries and improvements in zoology.
Order Carnivora. doi:10.5962/bhl.title.127802 (https://doi.org/10.5962%2Fbhl.title.127802).
293. Hamilton, S. (2000). "How precise and accurate are data obtained using. an infrared scope on
burrow-nesting sooty shearwaters Puffinus griseus?" (http://www.marineornithology.org/PDF/28_1/28
_1_1.pdf) (PDF). Marine Ornithology. 28 (1): 1–6. doi:10.5038/2074-1235.28.1.450 (https://doi.org/1
0.5038%2F2074-1235.28.1.450). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://www.ma
rineornithology.org/PDF/28_1/28_1_1.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
294. Keane, Aidan; Brooke, M. de L.; McGowan, P. J. K. (2005). "Correlates of extinction risk and hunting
pressure in gamebirds (Galliformes)". Biological Conservation. 126 (2): 216–233.
Bibcode:2005BCons.126..216K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005BCons.126..216K).
doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2005.05.011 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.biocon.2005.05.011).
295. "The Guano War of 1865–1866" (http://www.zum.de/whkmla/military/19cen/guanowar.html). World
History at KMLA. Retrieved 18 December 2007.
296. Cooney, R.; Jepson, P. (2006). "The international wild bird trade: what's wrong with blanket bans?" (h
ttps://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0030605306000056). Oryx. 40 (1): 18–23. Bibcode:2006Oryx...40...18C
(https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2006Oryx...40...18C). doi:10.1017/S0030605306000056 (https://d
oi.org/10.1017%2FS0030605306000056).
297. Manzi, M.; Coomes, O. T. (2002). "Cormorant fishing in Southwestern China: a Traditional Fishery
under Siege. (Geographical Field Note)". Geographical Review. 92 (4): 597–603.
doi:10.2307/4140937 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4140937). JSTOR 4140937 (https://www.jstor.org/s
table/4140937).
298. Pullis La Rouche, G. (2006). "Birding in the United States: a demographic and economic analysis".
In Boere, G. C.; Galbraith, C. A.; Stroud, D. A. (eds.). Waterbirds around the world (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20110304124708/http://www.jncc.gov.uk/PDF/pub07_waterbirds_part6.2.5.pdf) (PDF).
Edinburgh: The Stationery Office. pp. 841–846. Archived from the original (http://www.jncc.gov.uk/PD
F/pub07_waterbirds_part6.2.5.pdf) (PDF) on 4 March 2011.
299. Chamberlain, D. E.; Vickery, J. A.; Glue, D. E.; Robinson, R. A.; Conway, G. J.; Woodburn, R. J. W.;
Cannon, A. R. (2005). "Annual and seasonal trends in the use of garden feeders by birds in winter".
Ibis. 147 (3): 563–575. Bibcode:2005Ibis..147..563C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005Ibis..14
7..563C). doi:10.1111/j.1474-919x.2005.00430.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1474-919x.2005.0043
0.x).
300. Routledge, S.; Routledge, K. (1917). "The Bird Cult of Easter Island". Folklore. 28 (4): 337–355.
doi:10.1080/0015587X.1917.9719006 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F0015587X.1917.9719006).
301. Ingersoll, Ernest (1923). "Birds in legend, fable and folklore" (https://archive.org/details/birdsinlegend
fab00inge). Longmans, Green and Co. p. 214 – via Wayback Machine.
302. Hauser, A. J. (1985). "Jonah: In Pursuit of the Dove". Journal of Biblical Literature. 104 (1): 21–37.
doi:10.2307/3260591 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3260591). JSTOR 3260591 (https://www.jstor.org/s
table/3260591).
303. Thankappan Nair, P. (1974). "The Peacock Cult in Asia". Asian Folklore Studies. 33 (2): 93–170.
doi:10.2307/1177550 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1177550). JSTOR 1177550 (https://www.jstor.org/s
table/1177550).
304. Botterweck, G. Johannes; Ringgren, Helmer (1990). Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament (htt
ps://books.google.com/books?id=MCOd-uAEQy0C&q=Ishtar%20doves&pg=PA35). Vol. VI. Grand
Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. pp. 35–36. ISBN 0-8028-2330-0.
305. Lewis, Sian; Llewellyn-Jones, Lloyd (2018). The Culture of Animals in Antiquity: A Sourcebook with
Commentaries (https://books.google.com/books?id=GvJFDwAAQBAJ&q=Ishtar%20doves&pg=PT3
35). New York City, New York and London, England: Routledge. p. 335. ISBN 978-1-315-20160-3.
306. Resig, Dorothy D. (9 February 2013). "The Enduring Symbolism of Doves, From Ancient Icon to
Biblical Mainstay" (https://web.archive.org/web/20130131120659/http://www.bib-arch.org/e-features/
enduring-doves.asp). BAR Magazine Bib-arch.org. Archived from the original (http://www.bib-arch.or
g/e-features/enduring-doves.asp) on 31 January 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2013.
307. Cyrino, Monica S. (2010). Aphrodite (https://books.google.com/books?id=7gyVn5GjXPkC&q=Aphrod
ite%20Monica%20S.%20Cyrino). Gods and Heroes of the Ancient World. New York City, New York
and London, England: Routledge. pp. 120–123. ISBN 978-0-415-77523-6.
308. Tinkle, Theresa (1996). Medieval Venuses and Cupids: Sexuality, Hermeneutics, and English Poetry
(https://books.google.com/books?id=gjhLACGml2cC&q=Mary&pg=PA80). Stanford, California:
Stanford University Press. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-8047-2515-6.
309. Simon, Erika (1983). Festivals of Attica: An Archaeological Companion (https://books.google.com/bo
oks?id=IHFYM-IGCO8C&q=Aphrodisia%20festival&pg=PA48). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin
Press. ISBN 0-299-09184-8.
310. Deacy, Susan; Villing, Alexandra (2001). Athena in the Classical World. Leiden, The Netherlands:
Koninklijke Brill NV. ISBN 978-90-04-12142-3.
311. Deacy, Susan (2008). Athena (https://books.google.com/books?id=kIiCAgAAQBAJ&q=Athena%20a
nd%20Ares%20Darmon&pg=PA163). London and New York City: Routledge. pp. 34–37, 74–75.
ISBN 978-0-415-30066-7.
312. Nilsson, Martin Persson (1950). The Minoan-Mycenaean Religion and Its Survival in Greek Religion
(second ed.). New York City, New York: Biblo & Tannen. pp. 491–496. ISBN 0-8196-0273-6.
313. Smith, S. (2011). "Generative landscapes: the step mountain motif in Tiwanaku iconography" (https://
web.archive.org/web/20190106203516/http://www.precolumbia.com/bearc/CAAS/AA12.pdf) (PDF).
Ancient America. 12: 1–69. Archived from the original (http://www.precolumbia.com/bearc/CAAS/AA
12.pdf) (Automatic PDF download) on 6 January 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2014.
314. Meighan, C.W. (1966). "Prehistoric Rock Paintings in Baja California". American Antiquity. 31 (3):
372–392. doi:10.2307/2694739 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2694739). JSTOR 2694739 (https://ww
w.jstor.org/stable/2694739).
315. Conard, Nicholas J. (2003). "Palaeolithic ivory sculptures from southwestern Germany and the
origins of figurative art". Nature. 426 (6968): 830–832. Bibcode:2003Natur.426..830C (https://ui.adsa
bs.harvard.edu/abs/2003Natur.426..830C). doi:10.1038/nature02186 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnat
ure02186). PMID 14685236 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14685236).
316. Tennyson, A; Martinson, P (2006). Extinct Birds of New Zealand. Wellington: Te Papa Press.
ISBN 978-0-909010-21-8.
317. Clarke, CP (1908). "A Pedestal of the Platform of the Peacock Throne". The Metropolitan Museum of
Art Bulletin. 3 (10): 182–183. doi:10.2307/3252550 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3252550).
JSTOR 3252550 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3252550).
318. "Birds of Mughal India – Shangri La" (https://www.shangrilahawaii.org/visit/exhibitions/birds-of-mugh
al-india/). www.shangrilahawaii.org. Retrieved 6 June 2024.
319. "On Birds and Beauty - The Metropolitan Museum of Art" (https://www.metmuseum.org/articles/conc
ourse-of-the-birds). www.metmuseum.org. 10 August 2016. Retrieved 6 June 2024.
320. Boime, Albert (1999). "John James Audubon: a birdwatcher's fanciful flights". Art History. 22 (5):
728–755. doi:10.1111/1467-8365.00184 (https://doi.org/10.1111%2F1467-8365.00184).
321. Chandler, A. (1934). "The Nightingale in Greek and Latin Poetry" (https://archive.org/details/sim_clas
sical-journal_1934-11_30_2/page/78). The Classical Journal. 30 (2): 78–84. JSTOR 3289944 (http
s://www.jstor.org/stable/3289944).
322. Lasky, E. D. (March 1992). "A Modern Day Albatross: The Valdez and Some of Life's Other Spills".
The English Journal. 81 (3): 44–46. doi:10.2307/820195 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F820195).
JSTOR 820195 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/820195).
323. Carson, A. (1998). "Vulture Investors, Predators of the 90s: An Ethical Examination". Journal of
Business Ethics. 17 (5): 543–555. doi:10.1023/A:1017974505642 (https://doi.org/10.1023%2FA%3A
1017974505642).
324. Enriquez, P. L.; Mikkola, H. (1997). "Comparative study of general public owl knowledge in Costa
Rica, Central America and Malawi, Africa". In Duncan, J. R.; Johnson, D. H.; Nicholls, T. H. (eds.).
Biology and conservation of owls of the Northern Hemisphere. General Technical Report NC-190. St.
Paul, Minnesota: USDA Forest Service. pp. 160–166.
325. Lewis, DP (2005). "Owls in Mythology and Culture" (http://www.owlpages.com/articles.php?section=
Owl+Mythology&title=Myth+and+Culture). Owlpages.com. Retrieved 15 September 2007.
326. Dupree, N. (1974). "An Interpretation of the Role of the Hoopoe in Afghan Folklore and Magic".
Folklore. 85 (3): 173–193. doi:10.1080/0015587X.1974.9716553 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F001558
7X.1974.9716553). JSTOR 1260073 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1260073).
327. Fox-Davies, A. C. (1985). A Complete Guide to Heraldry. Bloomsbury.
328. "Flag description - the World Factbook" (https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/field/flag-descriptio
n/).
329. "List of National Birds of All Countries" (https://www.vedantu.com/blog/national-birds-of-all-countries).
330. Head, Matthew (1997). "Birdsong and the Origins of Music". Journal of the Royal Musical
Association. 122 (1): 1–23. doi:10.1093/jrma/122.1.1 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fjrma%2F122.1.1).
331. Clark, Suzannah (2001). Music Theory and Natural Order from the Renaissance to the Early
Twentieth Century. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-77191-9.
332. Reich, Ronni (15 October 2010). "NJIT professor finds nothing cuckoo in serenading our feathered
friends" (http://www.nj.com/entertainment/music/index.ssf/2010/10/njit_professor_finds_nothing_c.ht
ml). Star Ledger. Retrieved 19 June 2011.
333. Taylor, Hollis (21 March 2011). "Composers' Appropriation of Pied Butcherbird Song: Henry Tate's
"undersong of Australia" Comes of Age" (https://web.archive.org/web/20170804113556/http://www.j
mro.org.au/index.php/mca2/article/view/43). Journal of Music Research Online. 2. Archived from the
original (http://www.jmro.org.au/index.php/mca2/article/view/43) on 4 August 2017. Retrieved
26 June 2017.
334. Davin, Laurent; Tejero, José-Miguel; Simmons, Tal; Shaham, Dana; Borvon, Aurélia; Tourny, Olivier;
Bridault, Anne; Rabinovich, Rivka; Sindel, Marion; Khalaily, Hamudi; Valla, François (2023). "Bone
aerophones from Eynan-Mallaha (Israel) indicate imitation of raptor calls by the last hunter-gatherers
in the Levant" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10256695). Scientific Reports. 13 (1):
8709. Bibcode:2023NatSR..13.8709D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023NatSR..13.8709D).
doi:10.1038/s41598-023-35700-9 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41598-023-35700-9). PMC 10256695
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10256695). PMID 37296190 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nl
m.nih.gov/37296190).
335. Fuller, Errol (2000). Extinct Birds (2nd ed.). Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-
850837-9.
336. Steadman, D. (2006). Extinction and Biogeography in Tropical Pacific Birds. University of Chicago
Press. ISBN 978-0-226-77142-7.
337. "BirdLife International announces more Critically Endangered birds than ever before" (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20130617183344/http://www.birdlife.org/news/pr/2009/05/red_list.html). BirdLife.
BirdLife International. 14 May 2009. Archived from the original (http://www.birdlife.org/news/pr/2009/
05/red_list.html) on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2009.
338. Kinver, Mark (13 May 2009). "Birds at risk reach record high" (https://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/80
45971.stm). BBC News Online. Retrieved 15 May 2009.
339. "Nearly 3 Billion Birds Gone" (https://www.birds.cornell.edu/home/bring-birds-back/). CornellLab.
Retrieved 5 May 2024.
340. Axelson, Gustave (19 September 2019). "Vanishing: More Than 1 in 4 Birds Has Disappeared in the
Last 50 Years" (https://www.allaboutbirds.org/news/vanishing-1-in-4-birds-gone/). All About Birds.
Retrieved 5 May 2024.
341. Norris, K; Pain, D, eds. (2002). Conserving Bird Biodiversity: General Principles and their
Application. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-78949-3.
342. Brothers, N. P. (1991). "Albatross mortality and associated bait loss in the Japanese longline fishery
in the southern ocean". Biological Conservation. 55 (3): 255–268. Bibcode:1991BCons..55..255B (htt
ps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1991BCons..55..255B). doi:10.1016/0006-3207(91)90031-4 (https://d
oi.org/10.1016%2F0006-3207%2891%2990031-4).
343. Wurster, D.; Wurster, C.; Strickland, W. (July 1965). "Bird Mortality Following DDT Spray for Dutch
Elm Disease". Ecology. 46 (4): 488–499. Bibcode:1965Ecol...46..488W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.ed
u/abs/1965Ecol...46..488W). doi:10.2307/1934880 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1934880).
JSTOR 1934880 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1934880).; Wurster, C.F.; Wurster, D.H.; Strickland,
W.N. (1965). "Bird Mortality after Spraying for Dutch Elm Disease with DDT". Science. 148 (3666):
90–91. Bibcode:1965Sci...148...90W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1965Sci...148...90W).
doi:10.1126/science.148.3666.90 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.148.3666.90).
PMID 14258730 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14258730).
344. Blackburn, T.; Cassey, P.; Duncan, R.; Evans, K.; Gaston, K. (24 September 2004). "Avian Extinction
and Mammalian Introductions on Oceanic Islands". Science. 305 (5692): 1955–1958.
Bibcode:2004Sci...305.1955B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004Sci...305.1955B).
doi:10.1126/science.1101617 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1101617). PMID 15448269 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15448269).
345. Butchart, S.; Stattersfield, A.; Collar, N (2006). "How many bird extinctions have we prevented?" (http
s://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0030605306000950). Oryx. 40 (3): 266–79.
doi:10.1017/S0030605306000950 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0030605306000950).
346. Sundar, K. S. Gopi; Subramanya, S. (2010). "Bird use of rice fields in the Indian subcontinent".
Waterbirds. 33 (Special Issue 1): 44–70. Bibcode:2010WaBir..33...44S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.ed
u/abs/2010WaBir..33...44S). doi:10.1675/063.033.s104 (https://doi.org/10.1675%2F063.033.s104).
All the Birds of the World, Lynx Edicions, 2020.
Del Hoyo, Josep; Elliott, Andrew; Sargatal, Jordi (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World (17-
volume encyclopaedia), Lynx Edicions, Barcelona, 1992–2010. (Vol. 1: Ostrich to Ducks: ISBN 978-
84-87334-10-8, etc.).
Lederer, Roger; Carol Burr (2014). Latein für Vogelbeobachter: über 3000 ornithologische Begriffe
erklärt und erforscht, aus dem Englischen übersetzt von Susanne Kuhlmannn-Krieg, Verlag DuMont,
Köln, ISBN 978-3-8321-9491-8.
National Geographic Field Guide to Birds of North America, National Geographic, 7th edition, 2017.
ISBN 9781426218354
National Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Birds: Eastern Region, National Audubon
Society, Knopf.
National Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Birds: Western Region, National Audubon
Society, Knopf.
Svensson, Lars (2010). Birds of Europe, Princeton University Press, second edition.
ISBN 9780691143927
Svensson, Lars (2010). Collins Bird Guide: The Most Complete Guide to the Birds of Britain and
Europe, Collins, 2nd edition. ISBN 978-0007268146
Birdlife International (http://www.birdlife.org/) – Dedicated to bird conservation worldwide; has a
database with about 250,000 records on endangered bird species.
Bird biogeography (http://people.eku.edu/ritchisong/birdbiogeography1.htm)
Birds and Science (https://web.archive.org/web/20100810134957/http://www.audubon.org/bird/index.
html) from the National Audubon Society
Cornell Lab of Ornithology (https://www.birds.cornell.edu/)
"Bird" (https://web.archive.org/web/20230000000000/http://www.eol.org/pages/695). The
Encyclopedia of Life.
Essays on bird biology (http://www.stanford.edu/group/stanfordbirds/text/essays/completed_essays.
html)
North American Birds for Kids (http://www.mrnussbaum.com/birdsindex.htm) Archived (https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20100809090128/http://www.mrnussbaum.com/birdsindex.htm) 9 August 2010 at the
Wayback Machine
Ornithology (http://www.ornithology.com/)
Sora (http://sora.unm.edu/) – Searchable online research archive; Archives of the following
ornithological journals The Auk, Condor, Journal of Field Ornithology', North American Bird Bander,
Studies in Avian Biology, Pacific Coast Avifauna, and the Wilson Bulletin.
The Internet Bird Collection (http://ibc.lynxeds.com/) – A free library of videos of the world's birds
The Institute for Bird Populations, California (http://www.birdpop.org/)
List of field guides to birds (https://web.archive.org/web/20100323064035/http://media.library.uiuc.ed
u/cgi/b/bib/bix-idx?c=bix%3Bcc%3Dbix%3Bsid%3D0c4f6243857204b94fcdebc6dce5d8b2%3Btyp
e%3Dsimple%3Bpage%3Dbrowse%3Binst%3Dbix_10%3Bsort%3Dregion), from the International
Field Guides database
RSPB bird identifier (http://www.rspb.org.uk/wildlife/birdidentifier/) Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20131105112202/http://www.rspb.org.uk/wildlife/birdidentifier/) 5 November 2013 at the
Wayback Machine – Interactive identification of all UK birds
Are Birds Really Dinosaurs? (http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/diapsids/avians.html) — University of
California Museum of Paleontology.
Further reading
External links
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bird&oldid=1326188276"